The Papers of Abraham Lincoln is a long-term documentary editing project dedicated to identifying, imaging, and publishing all documents written by or to Abraham Lincoln during his lifetime (1809-1865). The project began as the Lincoln Legal Papers in 1985; in 2001 the project became the Papers of Abraham Lincoln.


== Editors and Directors ==
Daniel W. Stowell, 2000–present
Cullom Davis, 1988–2000 (Lincoln Legal Papers)


== Abraham Lincoln's Papers ==
Abraham Lincoln is one of America's most famous politicians who is consistently ranked as one of the greatest presidents ever to occupy the White House. Any scholarly study of his life is reliant on his written words to understand his thoughts, motives, and actions, however his assassination prevented Lincoln from organizing his papers himself. After his father's death, Robert Todd Lincoln gathered a large collection of papers and entrusted their organization to David Davis with the assistance of Lincoln's private secretaries John G. Nicolay and John Hay. Nicolay and Hay subsequently drew upon these nearly 20,000 documents to write their ten volume Lincoln biography published in 1890. Robert Lincoln subsequently deposited this collection of papers at the Library of Congress in 1919 and formally deeded them to the library in January 1923 under the stipulation that they remain sealed until twenty-one years after his own death. The records were finally opened to the public in 1947. While the Robert Todd Lincoln Collection of Abraham Lincoln Papers at the Library of Congress is the largest single repository collection of Lincoln documents, thousands of other items are located in repositories across the country, including the National Archives and in private collections that were either inherited or purchased. Because Lincoln documents are so voluminous and widely scattered, any attempt to identify, gather, and publish them all is a long, tedious, painstaking process.
Previous attempts to locate and publish Lincoln documents yielded limited results. One of the earliest and purportedly exhaustive attempts was Nicolay and Hay's Complete Works of Abraham Lincoln, consisting of 12 volumes, and published in 1905. Some authors supplemented the work of Lincoln's former secretaries with such volumes as Uncollected Letters of Abraham Lincoln, edited by Gilbert A. Tracy and Francis H. Allen (1917), Uncollected Works of Abraham Lincoln: His Letters, Addresses and Other Papers, edited by Rufus Rockwell Wilson (1947), and Paul Angle's New Letters and Papers of Lincoln (1930), to name a few.
In the 1930s, the Abraham Lincoln Association began collecting photostats of Lincoln documents and by 1945 began drafting plans that eventually culminated in The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, edited by Roy P. Basler, Marion Dolores Pratt, and Lloyd A. Dunlap, and published in 8 volumes (plus an index) between 1953 and 1955, with two supplemental volumes published in 1974 and 1990. These volumes have become a standard resource for Lincoln and Civil War scholarship, however they suffer from numerous limitations and omissions. First, Collected Works did not include incoming correspondence which denies the reader important contexts for understanding the documents. Second, twenty-first century technology and the maturation of documentary editing as a profession can now allow for more faithful renditions of the texts. Thirdly, in the nearly sixty years since the publication of Collected Works, researchers have discovered many new Lincoln documents, and new historical scholarship can better inform our understandings of the texts. With these reasons likely in mind, Lincoln biographer David Herbert Donald assessed, "Though Roy Basler and his associates did an excellent job of editing Lincoln's writings a generation ago, I believe that it is time for a new, complete, updated edition of his works." 


== Project Purpose and History ==
The major purpose of the Papers of Abraham Lincoln is "to preserve all of Lincoln's correspondence (both incoming and outgoing) and speeches with digital images, to provide authoritative transcriptions of those documents, to offer historical context for each document through annotation, and to make the images and transcriptions freely available over the Internet." In 2003, Richard Norton Smith, presidential historian and founding director of the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, identified the Papers of Abraham Lincoln as "one of our highest institutional priorities." He said, "It is hard to imagine a more valuable or enduring contribution to Lincoln studies than a new, comprehensive, scholarly and widely accessible edition of his papers."
The end goal is to produce three collections of Lincoln documents: Series I: Lincoln Legal Papers; Series II: Illinois Papers, which will include non-legal, pre-presidential Lincoln documents up to his presidential inauguration on March 4, 1861; and Series III: Presidential Papers.


=== Series I: Lincoln Legal Papers ===
The Abraham Lincoln Association began the project in 1985 as the Lincoln Legal Papers. Lincoln spent most of his life from 1836 to 1861 practicing law. With the exception of a few monographs on his legal career, Lincoln as a lawyer had remained a largely unexplored topic. Project staff searched 88 of Illinois's 102 county courthouses and over 60 archives to locate and photocopy Lincoln legal documents. The search yielded over 97,000 documents, which were published on 3 DVD-ROMs as The Law Practice of Abraham Lincoln: Complete Documentary Edition (University of Illinois, 2000), subsequently expanded in a free online edition as The Law Practice of Abraham Lincoln, Second Edition (Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, 2009). The project also published a selective print edition of the Lincoln legal papers entitled The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases (University of Virginia, 2008).


=== Series II: Illinois Papers and Series III: Presidential Papers ===
In 2001, the project became the Papers of Abraham Lincoln with the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency and the University of Illinois at Springfield as its sponsors. That year, the project staff began transcribing, editing, and annotating documents from Series II. In January 2001, The Lincoln Legal Papers research project distributed copies of the $2,000-each complete legal papers of Abraham Lincoln to every accredited law school in every state except Alaska, which lacked an accredited law school.
In 2003, the project conducted an extensive mail survey to thousands of libraries and historical sites to identify the whereabouts of any Lincoln documents. As of 2009, staff had visited 330 repositories in 45 states to scan Lincoln documents. Staff subsequently surveyed manuscript dealers and collectors. Project staff continue to regularly visit repositories, collectors, and dealers to acquire full color digital scans of Lincoln documents.
In 2003, the Papers of Abraham Lincoln launched The Lincoln Log: A Daily Chronology of the Life of Abraham Lincoln. The website is based upon the Lincoln Sesquicentennial Commission's volumes Lincoln Day by Day: A Chronology, but incorporates new discoveries and contains links to Collected Works.
In 2005, the project acquired the use of a document management and transcription system to catalog and transcribe the thousands of documents located. This database is the same system used by many other documentary editing projects including the Papers of Thomas Jefferson: Retirement Series and the Joseph Smith Papers. By 2009, the Papers of Abraham Lincoln had amassed about 39,000 digital images of Lincoln documents equaling 5.9 TB of data. As of September 2011, the project had 20 TBs of data. When the project is completed, director Stowell anticipates finding over 200,000 documents totalling over 45 TBs of data. Currently, the project's data is stored at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications.
In 2006, the Papers began a comprehensive search of records at the National Archives and Records Administration building in College Park, MD (Archives II). In 2011, project staff completed searching the records at Archives II. They located and scanned 29,217 documents written from and to Lincoln. By comparison, the editors of The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln identified 455 documents among the records currently housed at Archives II. In 2008, project director, Daniel Stowell, reached an agreement with the National Archives to digitize Lincoln documents from the Archives' vault. Also in 2008, staff began searching the records at the National Archives Building in Washington, DC (Archives I). As of 2011, the project has four full-time assistant editors identifying and digitizing records at Archives I.
The Papers of Abraham Lincoln began a cooperative effort with the Library of Congress Manuscript Division in 2007 to capture high-resolution, color scans of documents from the Robert Todd Lincoln collection.


== On Television ==
In 2007, Associate Director John A. Lupton authenticated a Lincoln document on an episode of PBS's History Detectives.
Several project staff, including Daniel Stowell, Stacy Pratt McDermott, and John Lupton, and Lincoln Legal Papers director Cullom Davis, appeared in the 2009 documentary Lincoln: Prelude to the Presidency, which aired on many PBS stations.


== Funding Agencies and Endorsements ==
The Papers of Abraham Lincoln is a project of the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency and the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum. The Center for State Policy and Leadership at the University of Illinois-Springfield and the Abraham Lincoln Association are co-sponsors of the project. Additional funding comes from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the National Historical Publications and Records Commission, the Shelby Cullom Davis Charitable Fund, the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library Foundation. A number of private contributors also support the project.
The National Endowment for the Humanities designated the Papers of Abraham Lincoln as a We the People project in 2004. This designation recognizes projects that enhance the study and understanding of American history. The National Historical Publications and Records Commission, the granting agency of the National Archives, endorsed the Papers of Abraham Lincoln in May 2008. The project also received an endorsement from the Illinois Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.


== Awards ==
Book of the Year, Illinois State Historical Society, April 2009 for Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases
Winner, Abraham Lincoln Institute of the Mid-Atlantic Book Award, in recognition of this "monumental contribution to scholarship," March 2001 for The Law Practice of Abraham Lincoln: Complete Documentary Edition
Finalist, The eLincoln Prize at Gettysburg College, February 2001 for The Law Practice of Abraham Lincoln: Complete Documentary Edition


== Reviews ==
Daniel W. Hamilton, Review of the Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases, in Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association, Summer 2011
Lewie Reece. Review of Stowell, Daniel W., ed., The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases. H-Law, H-Net Reviews. July, 2009
Douglas L. Wilson's review of The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases in Humanities, January/February 2008
Allen C. Guelzo's review of The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases in Lincoln Herald (Summer 2008)


== See also ==
The Papers of George Washington
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson
The Papers of James Madison
The Joseph Smith Papers
Einstein Papers Project


== References ==


== External links ==
The Papers of Abraham Lincoln
The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Images from the National Archives and Library of Congress A preliminary publication of documents
The Law Practice of Abraham Lincoln, Second Edition, online edition
The Papers of Abraham Lincoln: Legal Documents and Cases, selective book edition
The Lincoln Log: A Daily Chronology of the Life of Abraham Lincoln
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum
Center for State Policy and Leadership at the University of Illinois-Springfield
Abraham Lincoln Association
The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, edited by Roy P. Basler, Marion Dolores Pratt and Lloyd A. Dunlap (1953)
Abraham Lincoln Papers at the Library of Congress
National Endowment for the Humanities
National Historical Publications and Records CommissionRoy Basler (1906-1989)  was an American historian who rose to prominence in the middle of the 20th century. Basler was most famous for editing the collected works of Abraham Lincoln. He also wrote the introduction to Sam Watkins' "Co Aytch"


== Bibliography ==
The Lincoln Legend: A Study in Changing Conceptions. By Roy Basler. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1935.
The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. By Abraham Lincoln (Author), Roy P. Basler (Editor). New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1953.The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission (ALBC) was the Congressionally created 14-member federal commission focused on planning and commemorating the 200th birthday of the United States' 16th president on February 12, 2009. The commission served for ten years, from 2000 to 2010. Its official successor organization, announced in 2011 with an expanded board and broadened mission, is The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Foundation.


== Commissioners ==
The ALBC was established by the passage of the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission Act in 2000 (Public Law No: 106-173). The commission's 14 members were a diverse group of political leaders, jurists, scholars and collectors, chosen for their knowledge of Lincoln and their experience educating the public on his life, times, and historical impact. The Commissioners were appointed by the President, the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate, with input from the governors of Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky. Commissioners included:
Richard J. Durbin, United States Senator from Illinois, ALBC Co-chair
Harold Holzer, ALBC Co-chair and Senior Vice President for External Affairs at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Dr. Jean Bandler
Dr. Darrel E. Bigham, professor of history at the University of Southern Indiana
William Bartelt, an American historian and author considered the greatest living scholar on Abraham Lincoln's youth in Indiana
Dr. Gabor Boritt, Robert Fluhrer, Professor of Civil War Studies and Director of the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College
Jim Bunning, United States Senator from Kentucky
Julie Cellini
James O. Horton, Joan L. Banneker Professor of American Studies and History at George Washington University and Historian Emeritus of the National Museum of American History
Rep. Jesse L. Jackson Jr. (D - IL)
Lura Lynn Ryan, former First Lady of Illinois
Louise Taper, owner of the Taper Collection, the most significant private collection of Lincoln artifacts (acquired in 2007 by the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum)
Judge Tommy Turner, founded Lincoln Museum in Hodgenville, Kentucky
Frank J. Williams, former Chief Justice (Ret.) of the Rhode Island Supreme Court and Lincoln scholar
Ray LaHood, former U.S. congressman from Illinois's 18th congressional district served as ALBC Co-chair until January 2009 when he was subsequently appointed and assumed office as United States Secretary of Transportation in President Barack Obama's administration.
Eileen R. Mackevich served as Executive Director from 2006 to 2010. Her predecessor was Michael Bishop.
Other staff included:
Jennifer Rosenfeld, deputy executive director
David Early, director of communications
Courtney Barefoot
V. Suresh
Hasan Aloul, webmaster
Bryan Jack
Sharon Cunningham, accountant
David Morgan
Genevieve Courbois
ALBC offices are located in the John Adams Building of the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.


== Overview ==
Established by the United States Congress, the ALBC aims to celebrate the life and legacy of Lincoln while reinvigorating his thoughts, ideals and spirit throughout America and around the world. The commission's goals highlight numerous projects and cultural events including nine signature events:
The National Opening Ceremony - Louisville, Kentucky and Hodgenville, Kentucky.
The Mother's Day Celebration - Lincoln City, Indiana.
Birthday Tribute and Wreath-Laying Ceremony in Washington, D.C.
The Lincoln Memorial Rededication Series - Washington, D.C.
Bicameral Celebration of Abraham Lincoln's Birthday: A Congressional Tribute - United States Capitol rotunda.
Exhibition - "With Malice Toward None: The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Exhibit" - Washington, DC
National Teach-In - National Archives, Washington, DC.
Howard University Conference: Emancipation and Race in the Age of Lincoln - April 16–18, 2009.
The Global Lincoln: A Conference Examining the Global Legacy of Abraham Lincoln - St. Catherine's College, University of Oxford - July 3–5, 2009.
Other ALBC tributes included:
New penny redesign series featuring four new pennies.
A new five-dollar bill.
2009 Bicentennial commemorative dollar coin.
Four United States Postal Service commemorative Lincoln stamps.
Ten town hall meetings around the United States.
A Dedication Day Ceremony in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, site of the Battle of Gettysburg and Lincoln's Gettysburg Address
"Rise Up and Hear: An Evening of Poetry Honoring Abraham Lincoln's Legacy" - Washington, D.C, September 22, 2008.
Additional Lincoln Bicentennial events included:
A week-long Lincoln Bicentennial Bike Tour, Tour de Lincoln, from August 16–23, 2008 which begins at Lincoln's birthplace in Hodgenville, Kentucky and concludes in Springfield, Illinois.
An international symposium in Paris, France.
Forever Free: Abraham Lincoln's Journey to Emancipation Traveling Exhibit.


=== State liaisons ===
Governor-appointed liaisons from each state made up the ALBC's Governor Council. These liaisons served as contact points between the national ALBC and their state, and coordinate their own Bicentennial programs and events.
In addition to each liaison, 24 states established Lincoln Bicentennial Commissions:
Alabama Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Arizona Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Connecticut Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Delaware Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Idaho Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Illinois Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Indiana Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Iowa Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Kentucky Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Louisiana Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Massachusetts Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission
Michigan Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Missouri Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
New Hampshire Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
New Jersey Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission
New York Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial (Lincoln Commemorative Marker Program)
North Dakota Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Ohio Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial and Lincoln Legacy - Cincinnati
Oregon Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Pennsylvania Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Rhode Island Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Vermont Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
West Virginia Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial
Wyoming Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial


== Outreach ==
The ALBC collaborated with numerous scholars and public figures as well as cultural and educational institutions to help educate and engage the public. An advisory board included more than 150 historians, scholars, civic leaders and Lincoln enthusiasts. Among them were Michael Beschloss, David Blight, Ken Burns, Richard Carwardine, David Herbert Donald, John Hope Franklin, Doris Kearns Goodwin, Dr. Allen C. Guelzo, James M. McPherson, Douglas Wilson, Orville Vernon Burton, Mario M. Cuomo, Dr. Roger Wilkins, Jack Kemp, and Sam Waterston.
In conjunction with the Library of Congress, the ALBC created an interactive exhibit titled "With Malice Toward None." The 2009–2010 traveling exhibit highlighted Lincoln's life and featured original speeches, letters, photos and artifacts.
Various organizations supported Lincoln's Bicentennial, including the New-York Historical Society; Huntington Library in San Marino, California; National Archives; Chicago Museum of History; Newberry Library in Chicago; Organization of American Historians; Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum in Springfield, Illinois; Lincoln Museum in Fort Wayne, Indiana; Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History; Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States (MOLLUS); Fetzer Institute in Kalamazoo, Michigan; National Park Service; and C-SPAN.


== Kentucky Inaugural Celebration ==
On February 11–12, 2008, the ALBC launched its two-year celebration of Lincoln's 200th birthday. The two-day event began in Louisville at the historic Henry Clay Hotel. Pulitzer Prize winning author Doris Kearns Goodwin, McConnell Center senior fellow Dr. Thomas Mackey and African-American historian Dr. Gerald L. Smith addressed the crowd during the Lincoln on Leadership Symposium.
That evening, The Kentucky Center for the Performing Arts hosted A Kentucky Salute to Abraham Lincoln. Popular radio journalist and Louisville native, Bob Edwards served as master of ceremonies. Performances included the Louisville Orchestra and opera soprano Angela Brown. Film producer Jerry Bruckheimer and his wife Linda Bruckheimer, a Kentucky native, welcomed the audience. American composer Peter Schickele premiered his new piece, Lincoln at Ease.
Capping the evening was award-winning actor Sam Waterston and Lincoln scholar Harold Holzer with their critically acclaimed production Lincoln Seen and Heard, a narrated and dramatic presentation of Lincoln's life.
A snow storm hit that evening and the next morning, on Lincoln's 199th birthday, icy roads forced the cancellation of the formal inaugural ceremony at the Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site in Hodgenville, Kentucky.
First Lady Laura Bush was scheduled to deliver the keynote address. Other speakers included United States Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne, ALBC Commissioners Tommy Turner and Harold Holzer, U.S. Congressman Ron Lewis (R-KY) and Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear. Award-winning actor Sam Waterston was set to narrate the Gettysburg Address. Period music by the famed brass band Saxton's Cornet Band and the American Spiritual Ensemble was also planned.


== Lincoln Mother's Day Celebration ==
On May 11, 2008, the ALBC celebrated its second national signature event in Lincoln City, Indiana. Paying tribute to the women in Lincoln's life, the Lincoln Mother's Day Celebration also served as the statewide Lincoln Bicentennial kick-off for the Indiana ALBC. However, blustering wind and rainy conditions nearly cancelled the tribute. Scheduled for the Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial, the commemoration survived after National Park Service relocated the event to the Lincoln State Park.
ALBC Commissioners Joan Flinspach and Dr. Darrel Bigham addressed the audience along with Indiana Governor Mitch Daniels and Congressman Baron Hill.


== Rise Up and Hear: An Evening of Poetry Honoring Abraham Lincoln's Legacy ==
In collaboration with the National Endowment for the Arts and the Poetry Foundation, the ALBC showcased an evening of poetry and music enjoyed by Lincoln as well as works inspired by his leadership. Featuring a variety of well-known poets and actors, the program included readings of contemporary and classic poems.
Special guests included actors Joan Allen and Sam Waterston. Dana Gioia, poet and Chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts led the evening festivities. Other attendees included former Secretary of Interior Dirk Kempthorne; ALBC Co-Chair Harold Holzer; Poet and President of the Poetry Foundation John Barr; Former U.S. Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky; and 2008 Poetry Out Loud National Champion Shawntay Henry. The band Dead Man's Hollow performed Lincoln-era music.
The September 22, 2008 event took place at the Sidney Yates Auditorium in the United States Department of Interior.


== National Teach-In ==
The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission, in partnership with the History Channel, featured a National Teach-In on the life and legacy of Abraham Lincoln broadcast live from the National Archives in Washington, D.C.
The special live event featured Lincoln scholars, Doris Kearns Goodwin, Matthew Pinsker and Harold Holzer, sharing their expertise and answering students' questions.
Over 5,000 schools from the US and countless more from nine different countries participated. The webcast sparked hundreds of people to submit questions.


== Lincoln Memorial Rededication Series ==
A three-part event, the Lincoln Memorial Rededication Series featured appearances by some of America's most notable figures, including Members of Congress, Michael Feinstein, Colin Powell and the U.S. Marine Corps Band.


=== February 12, 2009 ===
Birthday Tribute and Wreath-Laying Ceremony - 8:00 AM:
Four-time Grammy-nominated singer Michael Feinstein sang the National Anthem, accompanied by the U.S. Marine Corps Band. Acclaimed poet and author Nikki Giovanni recited her new work, "At this Moment", written especially for the Bicentennial. And ALBC Co-Chairs Senator Dick Durbin and Harold Holzer addressed the crowd.
Other attendees and speakers included Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood, Secretary of Interior Ken Salazar; MOLLUS 57th Commander-in-Chief Karl Schaeffer and Gordon R. Bury, 54th MOLLUS Commander-in-Chief; and retired Rhode Island Supreme Court Chief Justice – and ALBC Commissioner – Frank J. Williams who read the Gettysburg Address with school children from Strong John Thomson Elementary School in Washington, DC.
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces Judge Scott Stucky was Master of Ceremonies.
Wreaths were presented on behalf of the people of the United States, the diplomatic corps, and various hereditary organizations, including the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in a stirring ceremony.
Photos from that morning and a video of Michael Feinstein's performance can be found at the Lincoln Bicentennial's website.
Bicameral Celebration of Abraham Lincoln’s Birthday: A Congressional Tribute - 11:30 AM:
President Barack Obama paid tribute to the former legislator from Illinois in the United States Capitol rotunda and US Army Chorus resoundingly performed "Battle Hymn of the Republic" as House and Senate leaders convened to commemorate Lincoln's 200th birthday.
Senators Dick Durbin, Jim Bunning, Mitch McConnell and Harry Reid addressed the assembly and Illinois Congressmen Jesse Jackson, Jr and Donald Manzullo recited the Gettysburg Address. Other speakers included Rep. John Boehner; House Speaker Nancy Pelosi; ALBC Co-Chair Harold Holzer; Dr. Richard Norton Smith, former executive director of the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library; and Doris Kearns Goodwin, author and presidential historian.
Goodwin spoke about Lincoln's presidential leadership, and Dr. Smith addressed Lincoln's early years as a state legislator and Member of Congress. C-SPAN provided full coverage of the Bicameral Tribute.
Below is the list of speakers (in order) with some of their remarks:
President Barack Obama
Sen. Richard Durbin
Sen. Jim Bunning
Harold Holzer
Congressmen Jesse Jackson and Donald Manzullo, both recited portions of Gettysburg Address, respectively.
Richard Norton Smith
Doris Kearns Goodwin
Rep. John Boehner
Sen. Mitch McConnell
Sen. Harry Reid
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi


=== April 12, 2009 ===
The second part of the Lincoln Memorial Rededication Series, the ALBC and NPS combined efforts to produce the Marian Anderson Tribute and Naturalization Ceremony.
On Easter Sunday 1939, contralto Marian Anderson famously performed on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial after the Daughters of the American Revolution barred her from singing at Constitution Hall due to the color of her skin.
Marian Anderson, who was born in 1897, was described as having "a voice heard once in a hundred years." Yet in 1939, she was denied the right to perform in Washington, DC's Constitution Hall due to the color of her skin. Through the efforts of Anderson, the NAACP, First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, and Interior Secretary Harold Ickes, arrangements were made to hold the concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.
On April 12, 2009, seventy years after Anderson set the stage for the modern civil rights era, acclaimed mezzo-soprano Denyce Graves performed at the Lincoln Memorial in a joyous Easter Sunday Concert paying tribute to Marian Anderson's performance.
Graves was joined by the internationally renowned a capella ensemble Sweet Honey in the Rock and the world-famous Chicago Children's Choir. Founded in 1956 at the First Unitarian Church in Chicago, by the late Rev. Christopher Moore.
Sponsored by the McCormick Foundation and others, the tribute also featured a naturalization ceremony of 191 new American citizens representing 56 countries. Gen. Colin Powell, the son of two Jamaican immigrants, delivered the keynote address.
The picturesque day concluded with the U.S. Marine Band performing John Philip Sousa's "The Stars and Stripes Forever."


=== May 30, 2009 ===
On May 30, 1922 President Warren G. Harding commemorated the life of President Lincoln with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial. Exactly four score and seven years later the ALBC, National Park Service, Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States and the Military District of Washington, presented a Rededication Retrospective.
The program, at the Lincoln Memorial, featured special guest speakers that delivered remarks about how Abraham Lincoln and the Lincoln Memorial remained entwined as beacons of freedom. The program also featured performances by the United States Marine Band and by William Farley, winner of Poetry Out Loud, who read Poet and well-known Abraham Lincoln biographer Carl Sandburg's The People, Yes.
Speakers and performers included:
Gordon R. Bury, 100th Commander-in-Chief of the Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
William Farley, 2009 Poetry Out Loud National Champion
Reverend Dr. Roger J. Gench, Senior pastor at New York Avenue Presbyterian Church in Washington, D.C.
Harold Holzer, ALBC Commissioner
Peggy O'Dell, Regional Director for the National Capitol
Dr. Benjamin Franklin Payton, President of Tuskegee University
Ernest "Ernie" Quintana, Acting Deputy Director of the National Park Service
Secretary Ken Salazar, Department of the Interior
United States Marine Band


== National Town Hall Meetings ==
On July 22, 2008 over 30 leaders from the fields of government, non-profit, civics, journalism, arts, humanities and education, met with the ALBC to discuss a series of National Town Halls.
Hosted by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., meeting attendants included U.S. Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr. (D-IL), chairman of the ALBC's town hall initiative; current Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood, then ALBC co-chair; former HUD Secretary Jack Kemp; William H. Gray III, former congressman and president of the United Negro College Fund; and Jim O'Shea, former managing editor of the Los Angeles Times. University of Chicago historians Charles Branham and Adam Green moderated the discussion.
The result: Ten cities (and later an 11th) chosen to lead discussions on Race, Freedom and Equality of Opportunity and focus on connecting Lincoln to the present day. To date, Gettysburg; Washington, DC; Detroit; Chicago; and the USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) in Everett, WA have featured Town Halls. Discussion topics have included political representation, liberty and justice, immigration, voting rights, interracial roots, leadership and the military, and reconstruction.
The ALBC national Town Halls are a joint collaboration with the Fetzer Institute of Kalamazoo, Michigan and a multiplicity of co-conveners.
Visit the ALBC for more details and information on the National Town Hall Series.


=== Gettysburg, Pennsylvania ===
Gettysburg College hosted the first national Town Hall on November 20, 2008. Panelists included Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr., Secretary Jack Kemp, Dr. Allen Guelzo, Susan Eisenhower and Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Governor's Advisory Commission on Latino Affairs Norman Bristol Colon. Charles R. Branham, senior historian at the DuSable Museum of African American History in Chicago moderated the discussion.
Over 300 people filled Union Ballroom as the panelists highlighted President Lincoln's role and impact during the American Civil War. Topics of discussion included race relations, equality of opportunity, the 2008 presidential election and cultural progression in America.


=== USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) - Everett, Washington ===
Focusing on "Lincoln, Leadership, and the Military," the February 27, 2009 meeting on board the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, USS Abraham Lincoln was the second of 11 town halls.
The program, produced in cooperation with the aircraft carrier's commanders and the Stennis Center for Public Service Leadership, included:
Matthew Pinsker, history professor at Dickinson College and author of Lincoln's Sanctuary: Abraham Lincoln and the Soldier's Home.
Robin Read, president of the National Foundation for Women Legislators
Joseph P. Reidy, Howard University history professor renowned for his scholarly work on African American sailors in the Civil War Navy
Donald Scott, retired U.S. Army general, expert on military leadership.
In addition to the give-and-take of the town hall, the Lincoln's crew heard the world-premiere of "Letters From Lincoln," a newly commissioned jazz work by Anthony Davis, composer of operas X, The Life and Times of Malcolm X; Under the Double Moon; and Amistad.
A congressional delegation, led by U.S. Reps. Norm Dicks (D-Wash.) and Rick Larsen (D-Wash.), also visited the carrier and participated in the town hall meeting.
Adam Green, associate professor of history at the University of Chicago whose work has focused on African American and U.S. history and comparative racial politics, moderated.


=== Washington, D.C. ===
Hosted by the Historical Society of Washington, DC, the ALBC's third national Town Hall focused on Race, Freedom, & Equality of Opportunity: The Right to Vote.
The distinguished panel explored the history of voting and voting rights in the U.S.; the struggle for voting rights waged by various groups of Americans; the cultural importance of casting a ballot as civic participation and empowerment; and how the District's voting limbo is part of that history.
Panelists included:
Wade Henderson, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
Donita Judge, Attorney, Advancement Project
Alexander Keyssar, Social Policy Professor, Harvard and author, "The Right to Vote"
Jonathan Turley, Renowned Constitutional Law Scholar, George Washington University Law School
Kenneth Thomas, Legislative Attorney, Congressional Research Service
Armstrong Williams, Syndicated Radio Host and Columnist
Ron Walters, Leadership & Politics Expert, University of Maryland, College Park, and author, "Freedom Is Not Enough"
Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr. and Howard University History professor, Dr. Edna Greene Medford delivered stirring and exceptional remarks.
The March 19, 2009 town hall also featured live musical performances from DC artists Rasi Caprice, Joe L Da Vessel and Melodic, and Chinwe Enu.
Askia Mohammad, news director of WPFW-FM Radio 89.3 and National Newspapers Publishers Association (NNPA) Syndicated Columnist, moderated the discussion.


=== Detroit, Michigan ===
In the fourth National Town Hall, the ALBC partnered with The Henry Ford Museum. The April 20, 2009 town hall discussed issues pertaining to Race, Freedom & Equality of Opportunity.
Participants included:
Douglas Brinkley, American author and distinguished Professor of History, Rice University
Darlene Clark Hine, Professor of African American Studies and History, Northwestern University
Dr. Arthur L. Johnson, educator, community leader and former Executive Secretary of NAACP-Detroit Branch
Dr. John Stauffer, Professor of English and African American Studies, Harvard University and author, Giants: The Parallel Lives of Frederick Douglass and Abraham Lincoln.
U.S. Rep. Maxine Waters (D-CA)
U.S. Ambassador Andrew Young


=== Chicago, Illinois ===
How do the stories we tell shape history, and how does history shape the stories we tell? This question highlighted the themes at the ALBC's fifth town hall. The June 29, 2009 program featured a conversation between Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr. and Chicago newspaperman Rick Kogan. The event was held at the Chicago Public Library.


== Endorsed events ==
The ALBC endorsed 224 events and programs representing 37 states and two foreign nations.


=== ALBC exhibits ===
The Library of Congress opened "With Malice Toward None: The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Exhibition" on February 12, 2009. Charting Lincoln's growth from prairie lawyer to preeminent statesman, the exhibit addresses the monumental issues Lincoln faced including slavery and race, dissolution of the Union and the American Civil War. The traveling exhibition features numerous photographs, letters, speeches, and campaign artifacts rarely seen by the public. Dates for "With Malice Toward None: The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Exhibit" can be found below:
February 12 - May 9, 2009: Library of Congress, Washington, DC
June 22–August 22, 2009: The California Museum, Sacramento, CA
October 10–December 19, 2009: Newberry Library, Chicago, IL
February 22–April 22, 2010: Indiana State Museum, Indianapolis, IN
September 4–November 6, 2010: Atlanta History Center, Atlanta, GA
January 8, 2011 – March 5, 2011: Durham Western Heritage Museum, Omaha, NE
A chronological list of additional national exhibits celebrating Lincoln's 200th birthday can be found on the Bicentennial website. This is not an exhaustive list.


=== Related events ===
New-York Historical Society exhibited a selection of handwritten public documents and letters in "Lincoln in His Own Words: An Intimate Portrait Of Our Greatest President" through July 12, 2009. From 2009 to 2010, The New-York Historical Society mounted "Lincoln and New York," an exhibition curated by Lincoln Bicentennial Commission co-chair Harold Holzer.


== The Global Lincoln ==
Oxford University was the site of a global conference discussing Lincoln's international significance and appeal. Scholars from around the world gathered at St. Catherine's College on July 3–5, 2009. The conference, titled Global Lincoln: An International Conference, focused on four subjects:
Lincoln, the United States and the World
Lincoln the Emancipator and Liberator
Lincoln the Nationalist Unifier and Modernizer
Lincoln the Progressive and Democrat
Professor Richard Carwardine moderated the conference.


=== Lincoln, the United States and the World ===
Contributions by Professor Carwardine, Dr. Jay Sexton of Oxford, Odd Arne Westad of London School of Economics and Lincoln scholar Harold Holzer explored Lincoln's understanding of the globe and US role in foreign affairs.
Dr. Sexton considered the ways in which American educators and statesmen attempted to project an image of the Lincoln across the globe, particularly during the Cold War and when formulating and articulating American foreign policy. Dr. Westad expanded on the Cold War and explored the ways in which peoples and states conceived of Lincoln and used his image for their own purposes. Finally, ALBC Commissioner Harold Holzer examined prints and statues of Lincoln's image across the world.


=== Lincoln the Emancipator and Liberator ===
Part two of the conference focused on Lincoln's international view as an emancipator and liberator. Professor Norman Saul of Kansas State delivered a Russian perspective of Lincoln and the president's image in the context of Russia's revolutionary changes during the birth of the soviet era. The discussion continued with a Latin America perspective from Professor Nicola Miller of the University College of London. Professor Miller examined how Lincoln served as a powerful symbol in Brazil and Cuba during those country's emancipation.
Finally, historian David Blight of Yale University revisited the perceptions of southerners during Lincoln's era. Initially, many feared him as the embodiment of 'Black Republicanism' but after the war these same southerners came to recognize him as the charitable alternative to the regime of radical Republicans during Reconstruction.


=== Lincoln the Nationalist Unifier and Modernizer ===
Part three focused on the time period between 1865 and 1945. Professor Eugenio Biagini of the University of Cambridge examined the perceptions of Lincoln in Germany and Italy as they underwent parallel processes of unification and economic growth. Other discussion topics included Lincoln's influence in East Asia, India, South Africa and during the Spanish Civil War with the "Lincoln Brigades."


=== Lincoln the Progressive and Democrat ===
Plans to explore Lincoln's legacy and reputation throughout Great Britain and Ireland. Adam I.P. Smith, University College London, discussed Lincoln's legacy as it relates to Scotland and England.
A Wales perspective came from Kenneth O. Morgan of University of Oxford. Professor Morgan addressed Lincoln's reputation and influence in Wales during the later 19th and early 20th centuries.
Professor Kevin Kenny of Boston College discussed Lincoln's relationship with Ireland. Professor Kenny broadened the discussion to include the Irish in America. The main focus was Lincoln's image in debates regarding Irish nationalism and Ireland's place in the Union.


== See also ==
Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln assassination
Lincoln's Birthday


== References ==


== External links ==
Lincoln Bicentennial official website
With Malice Toward None: The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Exhibition Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Online Lincoln Coloring Book for Teachers and Students
Lincoln in DC - Living the Legacy
List of State Liaisons
Kentucky: Lincoln Bicentennial
The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission of Lincoln, Illinois: His First Namesake City (Archived 2009-10-24)
Advisory Committee Members
Kentucky Inaugural Program
Mother's Day Celebration Program
Rise Up and Hear: An Evening of Poetry in Honor of Abraham Lincoln Program
Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Poster
Bicentennial Celebration in New York
C-SPAN's Lincoln 200 YearsThe speech known as Abraham Lincoln's "Lost Speech" was given at the Bloomington Convention on May 29, 1856, in Bloomington, Illinois. Traditionally regarded as lost because it was so engaging that reporters neglected to take notes, the speech is believed to have been an impassioned condemnation of slavery. It is possible the text was deliberately "lost" owing to its controversial content.


== Speech ==


=== Circumstances ===
Lincoln's Lost Speech was given at the since demolished building at the corner of East and Front Streets in downtown Bloomington, Illinois, known as Major's Hall on May 29, 1856. Lincoln gave the speech at the Anti-Nebraska Bloomington Convention that culminated with the founding of the state Republican Party.


=== Content ===
There are no known transcripts or written accounts of the Lost Speech, other than a brief summary in the local press. Eyewitnesses have offered snippets of some of Lincoln's content that day. William Herndon asserted that some of Lincoln's House Divided Speech was not based on new concepts at the time of its delivery. He wrote that Lincoln's "house divided against itself cannot stand" originated with the famous Bloomington speech of 1856. Editor of the Chicago Tribune Joseph Medill claimed that Chicago lawyer Henry Clay Whitney's transcript of the speech was accurate; Whitney's version was later debunked.
It is thought that the speech was a strongly worded derision of slavery. It is known that Lincoln's condemnation of the expansion of slavery was strong.


=== Why it was lost ===
The traditional reason given for the lack of any written recollection of the Lost Speech is that Lincoln's skilled and powerful oration had mesmerized every person in attendance. Reporters were said to have laid down their pencils and neglected note taking, as if hypnotized by Lincoln's words. When the speech ended no notes existed, so media reports of the day simply recorded the fact that the speech had been delivered.
There is evidence in Herndon's recollections that the fact that the speech was "lost" may not have been an accident. So strongly worded was Lincoln's oration that others in attendance feared the words might lead to a crumbling of the Union and that Lincoln consented to suspending "its repetition" for the duration of the 1856 campaign.


== Whitney version ==
In 1896, Chicago attorney Henry Clay Whitney published his account of the speech in an issue of McClure's Magazine. Whitney claimed he had taken notes during the speech and based his version of the speech upon those notes. Initially, Whitney's version was given some credibility. Ida Tarbell sought out Joseph Medill, who was present at the Lost Speech, and he claimed that Whitney's version displayed "remarkable accuracy".
Tarbell was unwittingly carried away by the story, but others were skeptical. Former Lincoln private secretary John George Nicolay declared Whitney's version devoid of Lincoln's style and a fraud. Robert Lincoln, Abraham's son, agreed with Nicolay's assessment. In 1900, the McLean County Historical Society declared their skepticism. In modern times, Lincoln researcher and Director of the Chicago Historical Society Paul M. Angle exposed Whitney's version of the speech and his claims of its validity as a "fabrication".


== Importance ==
Lincoln's Lost Speech was famous, with a status considered legendary by the time Tarbell became enamored with Whitney's version of it. Lincoln was said to have spoken "like a giant inspired" and the tale of how the speech came to be lost was well known. Many who attended the speech considered it the greatest of Lincoln's life. Given at the first state convention, which essentially founded the Illinois Republican Party, the speech thrust Lincoln into the national political limelight.
Though it was known as the Lost Speech, its content influenced people nonetheless. Those who heard it were often asked to repeat what they heard and a frenzied group of supporters spearheaded Lincoln's drive toward a second-place finish among U.S. vice presidential candidates in 1856.


== See also ==
Abraham Lincoln on slavery


== Notes ==


== Further reading ==
Crissey, Elwell. Lincoln's Lost Speech: The Pivot Of His Career, New York: 1967, Hawthorn Books, Inc.
Fenster, Julie M. The Case of Abraham Lincoln: A Story of Adultery, Murder, and the Making of a Great President, (Google Books), Palgrave Macmillan, 2007, (ISBN 140397635X).
Randall, J.G. "Life on the Circuit with Lincoln by Henry Clay Whitney" JSTOR book review, The American Historical Review, Vol. 46, No. 1 October 1940, pp. 172–3


== External links ==
Abraham Lincoln's Lost Speech
Bloomington was the scene for Lincoln's famous 'Lost Speech' - Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois newspaper)
'Bleeding Kansas’ rallying cry at great political gathering - Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois newspaper)
Rediscovery of Lincoln's 'Lost Speech' debunked - Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois newspaper)William Henry Herndon (December 25, 1818 – March 18, 1891) was a law partner and biographer of President Abraham Lincoln. He was an early member of the new Republican Party and was elected mayor of Springfield, Illinois.


== Early life ==

He was born the first child of Archer G. Herndon (1795–1867) and his wife on December 25, 1818 in Greensburg, Kentucky. His family moved to Illinois in 1820. Another child was born to Archer and his wife in Macon County, Illinois. By the spring of 1821 the family was living in Sangamon County. When William was five, the family settled in the German Prairie settlement located five miles northeast of Springfield. Two more children were born to the family there.
Herndon's father Archer built the first tavern in Springfield and was engaged in other forms of mercantile business from 1825 to 1836. He was also involved in politics as state senator; he was one of the men instrumental in having the state capital moved to Springfield.
William, known as "Billy" at the time, worked for his father at the Indian Queen hotel before he attended college. It was one of the first hotels in Springfield.


== Marriage and children ==
On March 26, 1840 Herndon married Mary J. Maxcy in Sangamon County. Mary's family were also early Illinois settlers; her grandfather and step-grandmother arrived in 1827 and Mary's immediate family arrived in 1834. Mary was born in Kentucky on July 27, 1822 to Maria Cook Maxcy and James Maxcy, a veteran of the War of 1812. James' father, Revolutionary War veteran Joel Maxcy, arrived in Sangamon County in 1827 with his second wife and died the following month.
Mary and William had six children: James, Annie, Beverly, Elizabeth, Leigh and Mary. Mary Herndon died on August 18, 1860. The following summer on July 31, 1861 Herndon married Anna Miles with whom he had three more children: Nina Belle, William and Minnie. The family moved to a farm in Fancy Creek Township located six miles north of Springfield.


== Education and career ==
Herndon attended Illinois College from 1836 to 1837 in Jacksonville, Illinois, but he had "an unsuccessful year". Following this, he returned to Springfield and clerked at the Joshua Speed store, where he often engaged in debates, discussions, and poetry readings with Abraham Lincoln. Their conversations and readings were sometimes practice sessions before presenting material to the Young Men's Lyceum, where both Herndon and Lincoln were members. It was an organization of aspiring young men.
In 1840 Herndon began studying law at the Logan and Lincoln law practice. Although employed at Joshua Speed's store, he studied up to 14 hours per day after work.
In November 1844, Herndon passed the bar examination. In 1854, ten years after beginning his partnership with Lincoln, he was elected mayor of Springfield, Illinois. Both men were members of the Whig Party. In 1856 Herndon was one of the organizers of the fledgling Republican Party after the dissolution of the Whigs. Lincoln also joined the Republican Party, hoping to "fuse" people of disparate political affiliations who wanted to end slavery.
Herndon loved to learn and developed "one of the best private libraries in Springfield" including works by historians, economists, humanists, free-thinkers and philosophers.
Herndon enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle well into middle age due to the successful law firm and his various elected and appointed offices. After the Civil War he suffered severe financial reversals due to bad investments, bank failures, excessive generosity to relatives and friends, and his inability to economize when his income declined sharply. By 1869, he was destitute and facing foreclosure on his home.


== Abraham Lincoln ==


=== Partnership ===
In the fall of 1844, Lincoln was tired of being a junior partner. He had worked for senior partners with political ambitions, and Lincoln wanted a younger partner to whom he could relate. Surprising both his wife and Herndon, in October Lincoln invited his friend to form a partnership. Lincoln appreciated Herndon's friendship, loyalty, shared political beliefs and conscientious study. Lincoln said that Herndon "was my man always above all other men on the globe." Herndon did not disappoint his friend. He contributed to the practice by performing research for his older and more experienced partner, building the firm's law library, and overseeing young men who came to study law (read the law) at their office.


=== Politics ===
Herndon was a much stauncher opponent of slavery than Lincoln and claimed that he helped change Lincoln's views on the subject. He felt that President Lincoln acted too slowly to bring an end to slavery. Herndon felt that the only way to rid the country of slavery was "through bloody revolution." 
During political campaigns Herndon made strong points that tended to alienate members of the Republican party - as well as swing voters, so for the 1860 presidential campaign, Herndon was not involved in direct political activities. He did execute an important task during that campaign, though, Herndon conducted opposition research in the Illinois State Library to be used against Stephen A. Douglas in the 1860 presidential race. Finally, when Lincoln balked against voting for himself Herndon ensured that he voted on election day.


=== Relationship with the Lincoln family ===
Through the whole of his partnership and friendship with Lincoln he was never invited to Lincoln's home for dinner due to his contentious relationship with Mary Todd Lincoln. He also admitted that his frustration with Lincoln's overly permissive parenting of his two younger sons, Willie and Tad, whom he recalled as undisciplined and disruptive brats in the law offices, caused some harsh words during their partnership.
His final meeting with Lincoln occurred in 1862 when he visited Washington, D.C. Lincoln received him amicably, but he was not invited into the family's private quarters in the White House due to the enmity of Mary Lincoln.


=== Biography ===


==== Initial research ====
Following Lincoln's assassination, Herndon began to collect stories of Lincoln's life from those who knew him. Herndon aspired to write a faithful portrait of his friend and law partner, based on his own observations and on hundreds of letters and interviews he had compiled for the purpose. He was determined to present Lincoln as a man, rather than a saint, and to reveal things that the prevailing Victorian era conventions said should be left out of the biography of a great national hero.
In particular, Herndon said of Lincoln's "official" biographers, John Nicolay and John Hay: "They are aiming, first, to do a superb piece of literary work; second, to make the story with the classes as against the masses." He felt that this would represent the "real Lincoln about as well as does a wax figure in the museum."


==== Shared research information ====
Ward Hill Lamon, who was then collaborating with a ghostwriter on a Lincoln biography, approached him for assistance. Herndon provided copies of and access to his original correspondences with Lincoln acquaintances and a written agreement not to publish his own biography of Lincoln for at least ten years in exchange for $2,000 cash and an agreement to receive up to $2,000 of the book's royalties.


==== Collaboration with Jesse Weik ====

By the time he was free to release his own biography of Lincoln, a miscellany of personal problems, including continued financial problems and his alcoholism, left him unable to formulate the stacks of papers into a coherent text.
A young man named Jesse W. Weik who had corresponded with Herndon became a good friend. They then collaborated on the biography of Lincoln's life. Weik performed additional research in the 1880s, picking up any new information since Herndon's original research, and rewrote much of Herndon's draft.
The collaboration between the two men was often contentious due to extreme creative differences in writing style and in their visions of what type of biography should result; Weik favored a narrative linear form while Herndon wanted essentially a loosely connected volume of reminiscences grouped by type such as domestic life, law practice, political philosophy, etc. However, the two persisted due to a recognition of their complete dependence on each other. Weik depended on Herndon for the source materials and first person accounts of Lincoln, and Herndon on Weik for the energy of creating the manuscript and increasingly for financial support, which guaranteed their continued relationship.
Herndon's Lincoln: The True Story of a Great Life, the result of their collaborations, appeared in a three volume edition published by Belford, Clarke & Company in 1889. The majority of the actual writing was done by Weik, who received full credit as co-author. The book received wildly mixed reviews due to the inclusion of such unvarnished elements as Lincoln's mother's illegitimacy (and even the rumors of Lincoln's own), its sometimes viciously negative portrayal of Herndon's longtime enemy Mary Todd Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln's suicidal depression, and other decidedly less than hagiographic accounts of the martyred president who was quickly becoming the most venerated and romanticized figure in American history.
Weik kept the notes gathered during the writing of the book and wrote a follow-up book The Real Lincoln: A Portrait, which included Weik's personal insights and some embarrassing details for Herndon. Weik's family kept them for fifty more years.


==== Reception ====
Particularly damning was the denunciation of the book by Robert Todd Lincoln, whose grudge against Herndon stemmed largely from Herndon's recounting of Ann Rutledge as the only romantic love of his father's life. Weik felt that Herndon's portrayal of Robert's mother and the Lincoln's domestic life was especially hurtful.
Questionable business practices and financial reversals on the part of the book's publishers, combined with the book's poor initial sales, made the royalties of its two authors very meager, with most of Herndon's share going to repay the frequent small loans advanced to him by Weik.


== Death ==
Herndon died March 18, 1891 at his farm north of Springfield. Herndon is buried in Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield, the same cemetery as the Lincoln Tomb.
Herndon's son William, or Willie, died the same day as his father. Herndon died of la grippe and his son Willie had la grippe that turned into pneumonia. At that time, William H., his wife Anna, Willie M. and their daughters Nina and Millie were at home. Herndon's wife Anna died less than two years later.


== Portrayal ==
He was portrayed by
Bob Gunton in the 2017 film The Gettysburg Address
Michael Maize in the 2012 film Saving Lincoln.
Keith Carradine in the 1992 movie Lincoln.
Jeffrey DeMunn in the 1988 (TV mini-series) Lincoln 
Alan Baxter in the 1940 biographical film Abe Lincoln in Illinois.
Jason Robards, Sr. in the 1930 film Abraham Lincoln.
Herndon was portrayed in many movies and films for decades.


== See also ==
Abraham Lincoln's patent


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
David Herbert Donald, Lincoln's Herndon (1948) the standard scholarly biography online
R. Vincent Enlow, "The Abraham Lincoln Genesis Cover-up: The Censored Origins of an Illustrious Ancestor," relating Herndon's accounts
Abraham Lincoln, Ed. Roy P. Basler (1953) "Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln", including the 15 February 1848 Letter from Lincoln to Herndon
Letters:
(1) William H. Herndon to Jesse W. Weik, Jan. 16, 1886, Herndon-Weik Collection, Library of Congress
(2) Mary Todd Lincoln to David Davis, Mar. 6, [1867], "Mary Todd Lincoln: Her Life and Letters," ed. Justin G. Turner and Linda Leavitt Turner (1972)


== External links ==
Works by William Herndon at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about William Herndon at Internet Archive
Works by William Herndon at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
William H. Herndon at Find a GraveWilliam H. Mumler (1832–1884) was an American spirit photographer who worked in New York and Boston. His first spirit photograph was a self-portrait which developed to apparently show his deceased cousin. Mumler then left his job as a jeweller, instead opting to work as a full-time photographer, taking advantage of the large number of people who had lost relatives in the American Civil War. Perhaps his two most famous works are the photograph of Mary Todd Lincoln with the ghost of her husband Abraham Lincoln, and his photo of Master Herrod, a medium, with three spirit guides.
After being accused of various activities, he was taken to court for fraud, with noted showman P. T. Barnum testifying against him. Though found not guilty, his career was over, and he died in poverty. Today, Mumler's photos are known to be fakes. Yet, they circulated widely in the following years and decades, and were marketed as objects of belief and visual curiosities both within and beyond the spiritualist movement.


== Biography ==

Before beginning his career as a spirit photographer, Mumler worked as an jewellery engraver in Boston, practicing amateur photography in his spare time. In the early 1860s, he developed a self-portrait that appeared to feature the apparition of his cousin who had been dead for 12 years. This is widely credited as the first "spirit photograph"—a photograph of a living subject featuring the likeness of a deceased person (often a relative) imprinted by the spirit of the deceased. Mumler then became a full-time spirit photographer, and moved to New York City where his work was analyzed by numerous photography experts, none of whom could find any evidence that they were fraudulent. Spirit photography is thought to have been a lucrative business thanks to the families of those killed during the American Civil War seeking reassurance that their relatives lived on.
He was married to a famous "healing medium," who conducted her own business beside her husband's.
Critics of Mumler's work included P. T. Barnum, who claimed Mumler was taking advantage of people whose judgment was clouded by grief, following a discovery that some of Mumler's 'ghosts' were in fact living people, and accusations that he had broken into houses to steal photos of deceased relatives. According to Joe Nickell "Mumler was exposed as a fraud when people recognized that some of the supposed spirits were still among the living." Mumler was brought to trial for fraud in April 1869. Barnum testified against him, hiring Abraham Bogardus to create a picture that appeared to show Barnum with the ghost of Abraham Lincoln to demonstrate the ease with which such photos could be created. Those testifying in support of Mumler included Moses A. Dow, a journalist who Mumler had photographed. Though acquitted of fraud, Mumler's career was ruined.
After the trial, he went on to be a "photograph publisher," discovering a photo printing process from wood-cuts, known then as the "Mumler process."  He died in 1884. Today, his photos are considered hoaxes.


== Photographs ==


=== Ghost of Abraham Lincoln ===

One of Mumler's most famous photographs apparently shows Mary Todd Lincoln with the "ghost" of her husband, Abraham Lincoln. Paranormal researcher Melvyn Willin, in his book Ghosts Caught on Film, claims that the photo was taken around 1869, and that Mumler did not know that his sitter was Lincoln, instead believing her to be a 'Mrs Tundall'. Willin goes on to say that Mumler did not discover who she was until after the photo was developed. The College of Psychic Studies, referencing notes belonging to William Stainton Moses (who has appeared in photographs by other spirit photographers), claim that the photo was taken in the early 1870s, that Mrs. Lincoln assumed the name of 'Mrs. Lindall,' and that she had to be encouraged by Mumler's wife (a medium) to identify her husband on the photo. Although the image has been dismissed as a fraudulent double exposure, it has been widely circulated.


=== Master Herrod ===

Master Herrod was a young medium from Bridgewater, Massachusetts photographed by Mumler in about 1872. One photograph, once developed, apparently showed Herrod in a trance surrounded by the spirits of Europe, Africa and America. The photograph was advertised for sale in The Religio-Philosophical Journal on August 24, 1872.


=== Other photographs ===
Other photographs by Mumler included pictures showing various spirits (including relatives, fiancés, actresses and spirit guides) with living sitters. Other well-known sitters include Moses A. Dow (editor of The Waverley Magazine) whose photograph apparently showed the spirit of his assistant Mabel Warren, and Fanny Conant, a well-known medium from Boston, apparently photographed with the ghost of her brother Chas.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Carrington, Hereward. (1907). The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism. Herbert B. Turner & Co. pp. 208–209.
Kaplan, Louis. (2008). The Strange Case of William Mumler, Spirit Photographer. University of Minnesota Press. Includes Mumler's autobiography and a large collection of his photos, including his well-known photo of the recently assassinated Abraham Lincoln comforting Mary Todd. Also includes news coverage of Mumler's sensational 1869 trial
Natale, Simone. (2016). Supernatural Entertainments: Victorian Spiritualism and the Rise of Modern Media Culture. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-07104-6. Esp. chapter 6, "The Marvels of Superimposition," pp. 134–169.
"Spiritual Photography". Illustrated Photographer, 1869.
"Obituary". Photographic Times and American Photographer. June 1884.


== External links ==
"A Brief History of Spirit Photography"
"The Mumler Mystery"Louis J. Weichmann (September 29, 1842 – June 5, 1902) was one of the chief witnesses for the prosecution in the trial of the alleged conspirators involved in the Abraham Lincoln assassination. Previously, he had been also a suspect in the conspiracy because of his association with Mary Surratt's family.


== Early life ==
Weichmann was born in Baltimore, Maryland, the son of German immigrants. The family surname was originally Wiechmann, but as in the case of many who emigrated to the United States, the name underwent several phonetic spelling changes. His father Johann was a Lutheran, and his mother Maria was a Catholic. Johann Weichmann was a tailor by trade, and he moved with his wife and their five children first from the vicinity of Baltimore to Washington D.C., and later to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Louis claims to have attended Central High School in the autobiographical work mentioned below. Central High School records show Louis Weichmann was a member of the 36th graduating class. He was admitted July 1856 and left in Sept. 1858 with a Partial Course Diploma. He wrote in his autobiographical work, A True History of the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln and of the Conspiracy of 1865, that he desired to pursue a career as a pharmacist, but, at the behest of his mother, he reluctantly agreed to study for the Roman Catholic priesthood. At the age of seventeen he entered the seminary at St. Charles College in Maryland. There he met and befriended a fellow seminarian, John Surratt, Jr. This friendship was to later have profound consequences for both of them.
In 1862, a year after the outbreak of the American Civil War, both Louis Weichmann and John Surratt, Jr., left the seminary without becoming priests. Weichmann went to Washington, D.C., where he taught school for two years at St. Matthew's Institute for Boys. After leaving this position in 1864, he became a clerk in the Department of War, headed by Secretary Edwin Stanton. John Surratt, Jr. had in the meantime become a courier and agent for the Confederacy, working out of Union territory. As a result of his earlier friendship with John Surratt Jr., Weichmann took lodgings in the boarding house of Surratt's mother, Mary Surratt, in Washington D.C. This brought him into contact with the major conspirators involved in Abraham Lincoln's assassination. According to Weichmann's testimony at the trial of the conspirators, John Wilkes Booth, David Herold, Lewis Payne, George Atzerodt, John Surratt, Jr., and others continually met at Mary Surratt's boarding house prior to the assassination.
Weichmann testified that on the day Abraham Lincoln was shot, April 14, 1865, he accompanied Mary Surratt to her other property in Surrattsville, (now Clinton, Maryland), where she delivered items that Booth later retrieved hours after the assassination. He further testified that Mary Surratt met with John Wilkes Booth no fewer than three times on that fateful day. Dr. Samuel Mudd, who treated Booth's broken leg on the night Lincoln was killed, and claimed to have no knowledge of the conspiracy, was linked by Weichmann's testimony to the events for which he was tried and found guilty as well. Augustus Howell, a blockade runner who worked with John Surratt, Jr., claimed during the trial that Weichmann had provided classified information obtained by his position at the War Department over to the Confederates. He, supposedly, was hoping to obtain a better job from the Confederate government at Richmond in exchange for his services; however, these accusations were never substantiated.


== Later life ==
In his later years Weichmann moved to Anderson, Indiana, where he opened a business school. One of his brothers, a Catholic priest, and two of his sisters had moved and settled there. Because of some lingering doubt as to the truth and motives of his testimony, Weichmann became a controversial and somewhat ostracized figure by many people. That Mary Surratt was the first woman tried and executed for a capital crime by the federal government caused a backlash against him. There also were strong anti-Catholic elements that attempted to link Lincoln's death to a Catholic conspiracy.
Partially because of this, he swore out an affidavit, shortly before his death, reaffirming that all his testimony concerning Abraham Lincoln's assassination was totally and completely true. He died a few days later in Anderson, and is buried there at St. Mary's Cemetery. Despite his using the spelling Weichmann at the conspiracy trial, in all his official correspondence and as the author of his book, the original family spelling of Wiechmann appears on his tombstone.


== References ==


== Bibliography ==

Weichmann, Louis J. A True History of the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln and of the Conspiracy of 1865 (1975)


== External links ==
samuelmudd.com
"Louis J. Weichmann". Find a Grave. Retrieved 2009-05-13.Charles Sabin Taft was a bystander physician who was pressed into service during the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.


== Lincoln's assassination ==
On April 14, 1865, Taft was in the audience watching the play, Our American Cousin, at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C., where President Lincoln was attending. Taft had a good view of the Lincolns in the box. He observed that Mrs. Lincoln, "often called his attention to some humorous stituation on the stage. She seemed to take great pleasure in witnessing his enjoyment".
When Lincoln was shot, Taft was either the second or third physician to get to the President after the shooting. Due to the assassin having barricaded the entrance to the President's box, he was boosted up from the main floor of the theatre.


== See also ==
Anderson Ruffin Abbott
Joseph K. Barnes
Julia Taft Bayne
Charles H. Crane
Albert Freeman Africanus King
Charles Augustus Leale


== References ==


== Sources ==
Kunhardt, Dorothy Meserve, and Kunhardt Jr., Phillip B. Twenty Days: A Narrative in Text and Pictures of the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln and the Twenty Days and Nights That Followed. New York: Castle Books, 1965.


== External links ==
Diary of Horatio Nelson Taft 1861-1865
Tad Lincoln's Father - complete online textRobert Todd Lincoln (August 1, 1843 – July 26, 1926) was an American politician, lawyer, and businessman. He was the first son of President Abraham Lincoln and Mary Todd Lincoln. Born in Springfield, Illinois, United States, he was the only one of Lincoln's four sons to live an adult life (his brother Tad Lincoln died shortly after his 18th birthday), and the only member of the family to survive into the 20th century.
Lincoln attended Harvard University, and then served on the staff of Ulysses S. Grant as a captain in the Union Army in the closing days of the American Civil War. Following completion of law school in Chicago, he built a successful law practice, becoming wealthy representing corporate clients.
After the war Lincoln married Mary Eunice Harlan, the daughter of a United States senator. They remained married until his death, and were the parents of three children.
Active in Republican politics, and a tangible symbol of his father's legacy, Robert Lincoln was often spoken of as a possible candidate for office, including the presidency, but never took steps to mount a campaign. The one office to which he was elected was town supervisor of South Chicago, which he held from 1876 to 1877; the town later became part of the city of Chicago. Lincoln accepted appointments as secretary of war in the administration of James A. Garfield, continuing under Chester A. Arthur, and as minister to the UK in the Benjamin Harrison administration.
After having served as counsel to the Pullman Palace Car Company, in 1897 he succeeded George Pullman as the company's president, and he remained affiliated with the company as president or chairman of the board until his death.
In Lincoln's later years he resided at homes in Washington, D.C. and Manchester, Vermont. The Manchester home, Hildene, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1977. In 1922 he took part in the dedication ceremonies for the Lincoln Memorial.
A dedicated amateur astronomer and golfer, Lincoln remained active almost until his death. He died at Hildene on July 26, 1926, six days before his eighty-third birthday, and was buried at Arlington National Cemetery.


== Family and early life ==
Robert Todd Lincoln was born in Springfield, Illinois, on August 1, 1843, to Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) and Mary Todd Lincoln (1818–1882). He had three younger brothers, Edward Baker Lincoln (1846–1850), William Wallace Lincoln (1850–1862) and Thomas "Tad" Lincoln (1853–1871). By the time Lincoln was born, his father had become a well-known member of the Whig political party and had previously served as a member of the state legislature for four terms. Robert Lincoln was named after his maternal grandfather.
By the time his father became president of the United States, Lincoln was the only one of the president's three children to be largely on his own. He took the Harvard University entrance examination in 1859, but failed fifteen out of the sixteen subjects. He was then enrolled at Phillips Exeter Academy to further prepare for attending college, and he graduated in 1860. Admitted to Harvard College, he graduated in 1864, and was a member of the Hasty Pudding Club and the Delta Kappa Epsilon (Alpha chapter). Morris states after gaining admission to Harvard, Robert Lincoln emerged from college an "unsympathetic bore."
After graduating from Harvard, Lincoln enrolled at Harvard Law School. When he initially expressed interest in the law school to his father, President Lincoln made reference to his own pleasant, but informal legal training by stating "If you do, you should learn more than I ever did, but you will never have so good a time." Robert Lincoln attended Harvard Law School from September, 1864 to January, 1865, and left in order to join the Union Army.
Much to the embarrassment of the president, Mary Todd Lincoln prevented Robert Lincoln from joining the Army until shortly before the war's conclusion. "We have lost one son, and his loss is as much as I can bear, without being called upon to make another sacrifice," Mary Todd Lincoln insisted to President Lincoln. President Lincoln argued "our son is not more dear to us than the sons of other people are to their mothers." However, Mary Todd Lincoln persisted by stating that she could not "bear to have Robert exposed to danger." In January 1865, the First Lady yielded and President Lincoln wrote Ulysses S. Grant, asking if Robert could be placed on his staff.

On February 11, 1865, he was commissioned as an assistant adjutant with the rank of captain and served in the last weeks of the American Civil War as part of General Ulysses S. Grant's immediate staff, a position which sharply minimized the likelihood that he would be involved in actual combat. He was present at Appomattox when Lee surrendered. He resigned his commission on June 12, 1865, and returned to civilian life.
Lincoln had a distant relationship with his father, in part because during his formative years, Abraham Lincoln spent months on the judicial circuit. Their relationship was similar to the one Abraham Lincoln had with his own father. Lincoln recalled, "During my childhood and early youth he was almost constantly away from home, attending court or making political speeches." Robert would later say his most vivid image of his father was of packing saddlebags to prepare for his travels through Illinois. Abraham Lincoln was proud of Robert and thought him bright, but also something of a competitor. An acquaintance purportedly said, "he guessed Bob would not do better than he had." The two lacked the strong bond Lincoln had with his other sons Willie and Tad, but Robert deeply admired his father and wept openly at his deathbed.
The night of his father's death, Robert had turned down an invitation to accompany his parents to Ford's Theatre, citing fatigue after spending much of his recent time in a covered wagon at the battlefront.
On April 25, 1865, Robert Lincoln wrote President Andrew Johnson requesting that he and his family be allowed to stay for two and a half weeks because his mother had told him that "she can not possibly be ready to leave here". Lincoln also acknowledged that he was aware of the "great inconvenience" that Johnson had since becoming president of the United States only a short time earlier. Following his father's assassination, in April 1865 Robert moved with his mother and his brother Tad to Chicago, where Robert completed his law studies at the Old University of Chicago law school (now the Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law). He was admitted to the bar on February 25, 1867. On January 1, 1866, Lincoln moved out of the apartment he shared with his mother and brother. He rented his own rooms in downtown Chicago to "begin to live with some degree of comfort" which he had not known when living with his family. Lincoln was licensed as an attorney in Chicago on February 22, 1867. He was certified to practice law four days later on February 26, 1867.
On September 24, 1868, Lincoln married the former Mary Eunice Harlan (September 25, 1846 – March 31, 1937), daughter of Senator James Harlan and Ann Eliza Peck of Mount Pleasant, Iowa. They had two daughters and one son.
Mary "Mamie" Lincoln (October 15, 1869 – November 21, 1938)
Abraham Lincoln II (nicknamed "Jack") (August 14, 1873 – March 5, 1890)
Jessie Harlan Lincoln (November 6, 1875 – January 4, 1948)
In an era before air conditioning, Robert, Mary and the children would often leave hot city life behind for the cooler climate of Mt. Pleasant. During the 1880s the family would "summer" at the Harlan home. The Harlan-Lincoln home, built in 1876, still stands today. Donated by Mary Harlan Lincoln to Iowa Wesleyan College in 1907, it now serves as a museum containing a collection of artefacts from the Lincoln family and from Abraham Lincoln's presidency.


=== Relationship with Mary Todd Lincoln ===
In 1871, tragedy beset the family again when Lincoln's only surviving brother, Tad, died at the age of 18, leaving his mother devastated with grief. Lincoln, who was already concerned about what he thought were his mother's "spend-thrift" ways and eccentric behavior, and fearing that she was a danger to herself, arranged to have her committed to a psychiatric hospital in Batavia, Illinois in 1875. With his mother in the hospital, he was left with control of her finances. On May 20, 1875, she arrived at Bellevue Place, a private, upscale sanitarium in the Fox River Valley.
Three months after being installed in Bellevue Place, Mary Lincoln engineered her escape. She smuggled letters to her lawyer, James B. Bradwell, and his wife, Myra Bradwell, who was not only her friend but also a feminist lawyer and fellow spiritualist. She also wrote to the editor of the Chicago Times, known for its sensational journalism. Soon, the public embarrassments Robert had hoped to avoid were looming, and his character and motives were in question. The director of Bellevue, who at Mary's commitment trial had assured the jury she would benefit from treatment at his facility, now in the face of potentially damaging publicity declared her well enough to go to Springfield to live with her sister as she desired. The commitment proceedings and following events led to a profound estrangement between Lincoln and his mother, and they never fully reconciled.


== Politics ==


=== Secretary of War (1881–1885) ===
From 1876 to 1877 Lincoln served as Town Supervisor of South Chicago, a town which was later absorbed into the city of Chicago. In 1877 he turned down President Rutherford B. Hayes' offer to appoint him Assistant Secretary of State, but later accepted an appointment as President James Garfield's Secretary of War, serving from 1881 to 1885 under Presidents Garfield and Chester A. Arthur.

During his term in office, the Cincinnati Riots of 1884 broke out over a case in which a jury gave a verdict of manslaughter rather than murder in a case that many suspected was rigged. Forty-five people died during three days of rioting before U.S. troops dispatched by Lincoln reestablished calm.
Following his service as Secretary of War, Lincoln helped Oscar Dudley in establishing the Illinois Industrial Training School for Boys in Norwood Park in 1887, after Dudley (a Humane Society employee) "discovered more homeless, neglected and abused boys than dogs on the city streets." The school relocated to Glenwood, Illinois in 1890 and most recently changed its name to Glenwood Academy; it first enrolled girls in 2001.


=== Minister to the Court of St. James's ===
Lincoln served as the U.S. minister to the United Kingdom from 1889 to 1893 under President Benjamin Harrison. Lincoln's young son, Abraham II "Jack", died during this time in Europe. After serving as minister, Lincoln returned to private business as a lawyer.


=== Later life ===
Lincoln was general counsel of the Pullman Palace Car Company under George Pullman, and was named president after Pullman's death in 1897. According to Almont Lindsey's 1942 book, The Pullman Strike, Lincoln arranged to have Pullman quietly excused from the subpoena issued for Pullman to testify in the 1895 trials of the leaders of the American Railway Union for conspiracy during the 1894 Pullman strike. Pullman hid from the deputy marshal sent to his office with the subpoena and then appeared with Lincoln to meet privately with Judge Grosscup after the jury had been dismissed. In 1911, Lincoln became chairman of the board, a position he held until 1922.
A serious amateur astronomer, Lincoln constructed an observatory at his home in Manchester, Vermont, and equipped it with a refracting telescope made in 1909 by Warner & Swasey with a six-inch objective lens by John A. Brashear Co., Ltd. Lincoln's telescope and observatory still exist; it has been restored and is used by a local astronomy club. Robert Lincoln made his last public appearance at the dedication ceremony in Washington, D.C. for his father's memorial on May 30, 1922.
Lincoln was also a dedicated golfer, and served as president of the Ekwanok Country Club in Manchester.


== Presence at assassinations ==
Robert Lincoln was coincidentally either present or nearby when three presidential assassinations occurred.
Lincoln was not present at his father's assassination. He was at the White House, and rushed to be with his parents. The president was moved to Petersen House after the shooting, where Robert attended his father's deathbed.
At President James A. Garfield's invitation, Lincoln was at the Sixth Street Train Station in Washington, D.C., where the president was shot by Charles J. Guiteau on July 2, 1881, and was an eyewitness to the event. Lincoln was serving as Garfield's Secretary of War at the time.
At President William McKinley's invitation, Lincoln was at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, where the president was shot by Leon Czolgosz on September 6, 1901, though he was not an eyewitness to the event.
Lincoln himself recognized these coincidences. He is said to have refused a later presidential invitation with the comment "No, I'm not going, and they'd better not ask me, because there is a certain fatality about presidential functions when I am present."


== Robert Lincoln and Edwin Booth ==
Robert Lincoln was once saved from possible serious injury or death by Edwin Booth, whose brother, John Wilkes Booth, was the assassin of Robert's father. The incident took place on a train platform in Jersey City, New Jersey. The exact date of the incident is uncertain, but it is believed to have taken place in late 1863 or early 1864, before John Wilkes Booth's assassination of President Lincoln (April 14, 1865).
Robert Lincoln recalled the incident in a 1909 letter to Richard Watson Gilder, editor of The Century Magazine:

The incident occurred while a group of passengers were late at night purchasing their sleeping car places from the conductor who stood on the station platform at the entrance of the car. The platform was about the height of the car floor, and there was of course a narrow space between the platform and the car body. There was some crowding, and I happened to be pressed by it against the car body while waiting my turn. In this situation the train began to move, and by the motion I was twisted off my feet, and had dropped somewhat, with feet downward, into the open space, and was personally helpless, when my coat collar was vigorously seized and I was quickly pulled up and out to a secure footing on the platform. Upon turning to thank my rescuer I saw it was Edwin Booth, whose face was of course well known to me, and I expressed my gratitude to him, and in doing so, called him by name.

Months later, while serving as an officer on the staff of General Ulysses S. Grant, Robert Lincoln recalled the incident to his fellow officer, Colonel Adam Badeau, who happened to be a friend of Edwin Booth. Badeau sent a letter to Booth, complimenting the actor for his heroism. Before receiving the letter, Booth had been unaware that the man whose life he had saved on the train platform had been the president's son. The incident was said to have been of some comfort to Edwin Booth following his brother's assassination of the president. President Ulysses Grant also sent Booth a letter of gratitude for his action.


== Republican politics ==
From 1884 to 1912, Lincoln's name was mentioned in varying degrees of seriousness as a candidate for the Republican presidential or vice-presidential nomination. At every turn, he adamantly disavowed any interest in running and stated he would not accept either position if nominated.


== Death and legacy ==

Robert Todd Lincoln died in his sleep at Hildene, his Vermont home, on July 26, 1926. He was 82. The cause of death was given by his physician as a "cerebral hemorrhage induced by arteriosclerosis".
He was later interred in Arlington National Cemetery in a sarcophagus designed by the sculptor James Earle Fraser. He is buried with his wife Mary and their son Jack, who died in London, England, of blood poisoning at the age of 16.
Lincoln was the last surviving member of both the Garfield and Arthur Cabinets, and the last surviving witness to the surrender at Appomattox Court House.
Of Robert's children, Jessie Harlan Lincoln Beckwith (1875–1948) had two children, Mary Lincoln Beckwith ("Peggy" 1898–1975) and Robert ("Bud") Todd Lincoln Beckwith (1904–1985), neither of whom had children of their own. Robert's other daughter, Mary Todd Lincoln ("Mamie") (1869–1938) married Charles Bradley Isham in 1891. They had one son, Lincoln Isham (1892–1971). Lincoln Isham married Leahalma Correa in 1919, but died without children.
The last person known to be of direct Lincoln lineage, Robert's grandson "Bud" Beckwith, died in 1985.


== Cultural depictions ==
The former child actor Ken Hardison played Robert Todd Lincoln in the 1955 episode "How Chance Made Lincoln President" in the anthology television series, TV Reader's Digest. Richard Gaines was cast as Abraham Lincoln, and Vivi Janiss as Mary Todd Lincoln.
In the 1998 television film The Day Lincoln Was Shot, the adult Robert Lincoln was portrayed by actor Wil Wheaton.
In the 2012 film Lincoln, Robert Lincoln was portrayed by Joseph Gordon-Levitt.
In 2016, he was portrayed by Canadian actor Neal Bledsoe in the NBC time traveling drama series Timeless.


== See also ==

List of people on the cover of Time Magazine: 1920s – March 8, 1926
Abraham Lincoln's patent
Lincoln family tree


== References ==


== Sources ==
Burlingame, Michael (2009). Abraham Lincoln: A Life. Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Charnwood, Lord (2009). Abraham Lincoln. Cosimo Classics. ISBN 978-1605207254. 
Emerson, Jason (2012). Giant in the Shadows: The Life of Robert T. Lincoln. Southern Illinois University Press. 
Graf, Leroy P. (1986). The Papers of Andrew Johnson, Volume 7: 1864-1865. Univ Tennessee Press. ISBN 978-0870494888. 
Morris, Jan (2001). Lincoln: A Foreigner's Quest. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0306810329. 
Roberts, Jeremy (2004). Abraham Lincoln. Presidential Leaders. Lerner Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0822508175. 


== External links ==
Robert Todd Lincoln
Photographs of Robert Todd Lincoln
Original Letters and Manuscripts: Robert Todd Lincoln Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Robert Todd Lincoln Rescued from Death by Brother of John Wilkes Booth
Robert Todd Lincoln Biography
Hildene
Glenwood School for Boys & Girls
Image of Robert Lincoln from "1888 Presidential Possibilities" card set t207.com
Robert Todd Lincoln's Biography in Secretaries of War and Secretaries of the Army a publication of the United States Army Center of Military History
Robert Todd Lincoln Attends Dedication of His Father's Memorial (1922)
"Robert Todd Lincoln". Find a Grave. Retrieved 2008-11-01. 
"Lincoln, Robert Todd". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 
"Lincoln, Robert Todd". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.David Herbert Donald (October 1, 1920 – May 17, 2009) was an American historian, best known for his acclaimed 1995 biography of Abraham Lincoln. He twice won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography for earlier works; he published more than 30 books on United States political and literary figures and the history of the American South.


== Early life and education ==
David Herbert Donald was born in Goodman, Mississippi, a town in the center of Holmes County. The county's western border is formed by the Yazoo River and it is part of the Mississippi-Yazoo Delta.


== Career ==
Majoring in history and sociology, Donald earned his bachelor's degree from Millsaps College in Jackson, Mississippi. He earned his PhD in 1946 under the eminent, leading Lincoln scholar, James G. Randall at the University of Illinois. Randall as a mentor influenced Donald's life and career. He encouraged his protégé to write his dissertation on Abraham Lincoln's law partner, William Herndon. Donald adapted and published the dissertation as his first book, Lincoln's Herndon (1948).
After completing his doctorate, Donald taught at Columbia University, Johns Hopkins and, from 1973, Harvard University. He also taught at Smith College, the University of North Wales, Princeton University, University College London and served as Harmsworth Professor of American History at Oxford University. At Johns Hopkins, Columbia, and Harvard he trained dozens of graduate students, including Jean H. Baker, William J. Cooper, Jr., Michael Holt, Irwin Unger, and Ari Hoogenboom.
Donald served as president of the Southern Historical Association. Donald also served on the editorial board for the Papers of Abraham Lincoln.
Donald was the Charles Warren Professor of American History (emeritus from 1991) at Harvard University. He wrote more than thirty books, including well-received biographies of Abraham Lincoln, Thomas Wolfe and Charles Sumner. He specialized in the American Civil War and Reconstruction periods, and in the history of the American South.


== Legacy and honors ==
Donald received the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography twice, in 1961 for Charles Sumner and the Coming of the Civil War and in 1988 for Look Homeward: A Life of Thomas Wolfe. He also received several honorary degrees.
David Herbert Donald was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln (the State’s highest honor) by the Governor of Illinois in 2008 in the area of Communications and Education. 


== Works ==
In his introduction, Carl Sandburg, the poet and Lincoln biographer, hailed Donald's first book as the answer to scholars' prayers: "When is someone going to do the life of Bill Herndon. Isn't it about time? Now the question is out."
David M. Potter, known as a Lincoln scholar, said Donald's biography of Charles Sumner portrayed, "Sumner as a man with acute psychological inadequacies" and exposed Sumner's "facade of pompous rectitude." Donald's evenhanded approach to Sumner, Potter concluded, was a model for biographers working with a difficult subject. "If it does not make Sumner attractive [the book] certainly makes him understandable."
Donald argues that the American Civil War was a needless war caused or hastened by the fanaticism of people like Charles Sumner; he admires Abraham Lincoln.


== Personal ==
Donald lived in Lincoln, Massachusetts, with his wife Aida DiPace Donald, who is also a historian and author. He died of heart failure in Boston on May 17, 2009. Donald is survived by his wife, his son Bruce Donald and two daughters.


== Books ==
Lincoln's Herndon (1948)
Divided We Fought: A Pictorial History of the War, 1861—1865 (1952)
Editor, Inside Lincoln's Cabinet: The Civil War Diaries of Salmon P. Chase. (1954)
Lincoln Reconsidered: Essays on the Civil War Era (1956, 2nd edition 1961, 3rd edition 2001) (ISBN 0-679-72310-2).
Charles Sumner and the Coming of the Civil War (1960). Pulitzer Prize-winning scholarly biography to 1860.
The Civil War and Reconstruction (1961; 2001) (ISBN 0-393-97427-8), 2001 edition with Jean H. Baker & Michael F. Holt; 1961 edition with James G. Randall.
Editor, Why the North Won the Civil War (1962) (ISBN 0-02-031660-7) (revised ed. 1996).
Editor with Aida DiPace Donald, Diary of Charles Francis Adams, Volumes 1 and 2, January 1820 - September 1829 (1964), Harvard University Press.
The Politics of Reconstruction, 1863-1867 (1965)
Charles Sumner and the Rights of Man (1970). Biography after 1860.
Look Homeward: A Life of Thomas Wolfe (1987), Harvard University Press (2003) (ISBN 0-674-00869-3).
Lincoln (1995) ISBN 0-684-80846-3
Lincoln at Home: Two Glimpses of Abraham Lincoln's Domestic Life (1999) ISBN 978-0-912308-77-7.
We Are Lincoln Men: Abraham Lincoln and His Friends (2003) (ISBN 0-7432-5468-6).


== Sources ==
Barnes & Noble
Paul Goodman, "David Donald's Charles Sumner Reconsidered" in The New England Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 3. (Sep., 1964), pp. 373–387.online at JSTOR
Ari Hoogenboom, "David Herbert Donald: A Celebration," in A Master's Due: Essays in Honor of David Herbert Donald, ed. William J. Cooper, Jr., et al.(Louisiana State University Press, 1985), 1—15.


== References ==


== External links ==
Appearances on C-SPAN
Booknotes interview with Donald on Lincoln, December 24, 1995.
In Depth interview with Donald, June 2, 2002.

David Herbert Donald at Find a Grave
David Herbert Donald, Daily Telegraph obituary.
New York Times obituary May 19, 2009.Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln is a 2005 book by Pulitzer Prize-winning American historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, published by Simon & Schuster. The book is a biographical portrait of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln and some of the men who served with him in his cabinet from 1861 to 1865. Three of his Cabinet members had previously run against Lincoln in the 1860 election: Attorney General Edward Bates, Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase and Secretary of State William H. Seward. The book focuses on Lincoln's mostly successful attempts to reconcile conflicting personalities and political factions on the path to abolition and victory in the American Civil War.
Goodwin's sixth book, Team of Rivals was well received by critics and won the 2006 Lincoln Prize and the inaugural Book Prize for American History of the New-York Historical Society. US President Barack Obama cited it as one of his favorite books and was said to have used it as a model for constructing his own cabinet. In 2012, a Steven Spielberg film based on the book was released to critical acclaim.


== Background ==
Team of Rivals is the sixth book by American historian Doris Kearns Goodwin. In 1995, Goodwin was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for History for her book No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II, a similar study of personalities in the Roosevelt White House.
Goodwin spent ten years on the research and writing of Team of Rivals. She stated that she had been inspired to tell the stories of the four men (Seward, Chase, Bates, and Lincoln) together when realizing that the cabinet members had written extensive diaries and letters that might provide a "new angle" in Lincoln studies.
During Goodwin's work on Team of Rivals, a plagiarism scandal erupted over unmarked quotations in Goodwin's 1987 book The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedys. Goodwin stated that in dealing with the scandal, during which she had to apologize and make an out-of-court settlement to author Lynne McTaggart, she found Lincoln a consolation, particularly his philosophy "not to waste precious energies on recriminations about the past". In a 2012 interview, Goodwin cited early 20th-century muckraker Ida Tarbell on the pleasures of writing about Lincoln: "Somebody asked her, why do so many people write about Lincoln? And she said, because he’s so companionable. And I think somehow that's been true for me."


== Contents ==
The first chapter of Team of Rivals portrays four major contenders for the 1860 Republican presidential nomination on May 18, 1860, awaiting the results of the national convention by telegraph: New York Senator and former governor William H. Seward, widely considered the frontrunner; Ohio Governor Salmon P. Chase, a favorite of the party's more radical wing; former Missouri Attorney General Edward Bates, preferred by more conservative elements of the party; and Abraham Lincoln, a former U.S. Representative from Illinois. Goodwin then describes how each candidate rose to national political prominence: Seward through a long alliance with New York political boss Thurlow Weed, Chase through his early advocacy of the abolition of slavery, Bates through a speech opposing President James K. Polk at the 1847 River and Harbor Convention, and Lincoln through a series of debates with Democratic rival Stephen A. Douglas in the 1858 Illinois Senate election. Lincoln is ultimately the victor at the 1860 convention through a superior political operation and by making himself the unobjectionable second choice of all Republican factions, and proceeds to win the presidency.

Determined both to hold the party together and to recruit the ablest men for his cabinet, Lincoln then persuaded each of his former rivals to join his cabinet. Seward assumed the post of Secretary of State, Chase that of Secretary of the Treasury, and Bates that of United States Attorney General. The South secedes following Lincoln's election, and the country falls into the American Civil War. Goodwin describes in detail some cabinet decisions, such as the debate over provisioning Fort Sumter in South Carolina, the first state that had seceded (in December 1860), and the issuing of the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed the slaves of secession states. She also traces the home life of the book's main figures, including the marriage of Chase's daughter and close companion Kate, First Lady Mary Todd Lincoln's role in Washington, D.C. society, and the death of Lincoln's son Willie.
During the war, Seward comes to respect and collaborate with Lincoln. Chase, on the other hand, schemes against Lincoln from within the cabinet, hoping to replace him as the Republican nominee in the 1864 presidential election. Lincoln nonetheless keeps Chase in the cabinet until 1864 for his skill at financing the war effort, and his efforts to undermine the president are ultimately unsuccessful. Lincoln also recruits Chase ally Edwin M. Stanton to replace Pennsylvania political boss Simon Cameron as Secretary of War; like Seward, Stanton comes to respect and support Lincoln. While managing the disparate personalities of his cabinet, Lincoln also struggles to manage a series of generals including George B. McClellan, Henry Halleck, and George Meade. The president finally finds success in 1864 by promoting Ulysses S. Grant to commander of the Union armies. Lincoln oversees the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which abolishes slavery, and sees the war to its successful conclusion. He also appoints Chase as the Chief Justice of the US Supreme Court, believing him the best man to secure the rights of newly freed black citizens.
Team of Rivals closes with the assassination of Abraham Lincoln on April 14, 1865. Seward is also attacked by a knife-wielding assailant, though he survives. An epilogue traces the later lives and deaths of Seward, Stanton, Bates, Chase, Mary Lincoln, and others.


== Response ==
Team of Rivals was generally well received by critics. Pulitzer Prize-winning Civil War historian James M. McPherson called it "an elegant, incisive study of Lincoln and leading members of his cabinet that will appeal to experts as well as to those whose knowledge of Lincoln is an amalgam of high school history and popular mythology" and stated that Goodwin addressed Lincoln's gift for coalition-building "better than any other writer". Allen C. Guelzo wrote in The Washington Post that "this immense, finely boned book is no dull administrative or bureaucratic history; rather, it is a story of personalities – a messianic drama, if you will – in which Lincoln must increase and the others must decrease." In the Seattle Times, Kimberly Marlowe Hartnett praised the book's "ambitious, multi-strand structure", concluding, "This monumental effort is a gift; Goodwin's work clarifies and preserves Lincoln's legacy with rare skill." Randy Dotinga of the Christian Science Monitor called Team of Rivals an "immense and immensely readable work". Sanford D. Horwitt of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that Goodwin is "an engaging, insightful chronicler of Lincoln's Civil War presidency, although she strays from time to time from her stated intention of keeping the lens focused on Lincoln and his 1860 rivals, who, in turn, were often feuding with others in Lincoln's Cabinet."
In 2006, the book was awarded the Lincoln Prize, "awarded annually for the finest scholarly work in English on Abraham Lincoln, the American Civil War soldier, or a subject relating to their era". On March 29, 2006, Goodwin was announced as the winner of the $50,000 Book Prize for American History of the New-York Historical Society. Team of Rivals was also a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award and the Los Angeles Times Book Prize.
U.S. President Barack Obama named Team of Rivals as the one book he would want on a desert island. As a senator, he met with Goodwin in Washington to discuss the book. After his election in 2008, Obama reached out to previous rivals including Hillary Clinton, who became his Secretary of State, drawing comparisons to Lincoln's "Team of Rivals" approach.


== Film adaptation ==

While consulting on a project for director Steven Spielberg in 1999, Goodwin told Spielberg she was planning to write Team of Rivals, and Spielberg immediately told her he wanted the film rights. DreamWorks finalized the deal in 2001, and Goodwin sent Spielberg the book chapter by chapter as she composed it. Daniel Day-Lewis agreed to play Abraham Lincoln after Liam Neeson, the original lead, withdrew from the project in 2010. The screenplay was written by Tony Kushner, who was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay). A number of critics noted that the final film, which focused almost entirely on the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment through Congress, was based on only a few pages of Goodwin's book, and that Kushner did substantial independent research composing the screenplay.
Filming began on October 17, 2011, and ended on December 19, 2011. Goodwin consulted with Kushner on various drafts of the screenplay and took Day-Lewis on a tour of Lincoln's home and law office in Springfield, Illinois. The film was released nationwide on November 16, 2012 to commercial success and wide critical acclaim. Day-Lewis won the 2012 Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance.


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===
Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2005). Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-7075-5. Retrieved June 2, 2013. 


== External links ==
Team of Rivals at doriskearnsgoodwin.com
Lincoln at the Internet Movie DatabaseGabor S. Boritt (born 1940 in Budapest, Hungary) is an American historian. He was the Robert Fluhrer Professor of Civil War Studies and Director of the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College. Born and raised in Hungary, he participated as a teenager in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 against the Soviet Union before escaping to America, where he received his higher education and became a scholar of Abraham Lincoln and the American Civil War. He is the author, co-author, or editor of 16 books about Lincoln or the War. Boritt received the National Humanities Medal in 2008 from President George W. Bush.


== Early life ==
Boritt was born to a Jewish family in Budapest, Hungary at the start of World War II. The Nazis forced his family to live in a single room in a hospital on the ghetto's edge, where he played on bloodstained floors. As his father helped lead resistance against the Nazis, his grandfather's family was deported from the countryside and murdered in Auschwitz. By the end of the war, Budapest was in ruins and Hungary in Stalin's grip. In the years that followed, Boritt's mother died, his father and brother were imprisoned, and he was sent to an orphanage. In 1956 sixteen-year-old Boritt joined the 1956 Hungarian Revolution. He remembers the initial euphoria: "We thought it was a whole new world. Anything was possible." Days later, 3,000 Soviet tanks crushed those possibilities, and Boritt and his sister Judith headed for the Austrian border. In darkness, they hiked through wooded hills before coming to a no-man's-land guarded by watchtowers with machine guns. Freedom lay on the other side. Together, they started running.


== Escape to America ==
After months at an Austrian refugee camp, Boritt came to the U.S. with just one dollar in his pocket, arriving in the "dirtiest city" he had ever seen: New York City. Told that the real America is "out west," Boritt headed to South Dakota. Wanting to learn English, he picked up a free booklet of Abraham Lincoln's writings. Captivated by Lincoln's mastery of the language and his rise from poverty to the presidency, Boritt began studying American history and earned his bachelor of arts degree from Yankton College in 1962 and a master's degree from the University of South Dakota in 1963, followed by a Ph.D. from Boston University in 1968.
As an immigrant, he felt obliged to go to Vietnam, where he taught soldiers about the American Civil War. In 1978 after deciding to pursue the study of Lincoln from the economic angle, he published his first book Lincoln and the Economics of the American Dream, which placed what Boritt called "the right to rise" at the center of Lincoln's outlook. One of a handful of books on Lincoln published in the 1970s, a 1995 survey of leading experts by Civil War Times lists it as one of the 10 most important books ever written about Lincoln.


== Gettysburg College ==
After teaching at the University of Michigan, in 1981 Boritt came to Gettysburg College, founding the Civil War Institute, where the school created for him the nation's first fully funded chair for the study of the Civil War. He helped create the $50,000 Lincoln Prize, widely considered the most coveted award for the study of American history. He also helped create the Gilder Lehrman Institute, which is focused on improving the teaching of history in schools.


== Modern accomplishments ==
Boritt served on the boards of the Gettysburg National Battlefield Museum Foundation and the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission, appointed by Congress. His latest book The Gettysburg Gospel: The Lincoln Speech Nobody Knows (2006) was featured on the cover of U.S. News and World Report and called "fascinating" by the New York Times. In September 2008 Boritt gave a tour of the Gettysburg battlefield to President George W. Bush, Laura Bush and a group including White House Advisor Karl Rove, Former Attorney General Alberto Gonzalez, and Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings.
On November 17, 2008 President George W. Bush awarded Boritt the National Humanities Medal from the National Endowment for the Humanities "for a distinguished career of scholarship on Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War era. His life's work and his life's story stand as testaments to our nation's precious legacy of liberty." His life story is the subject of a feature-length documentary film titled Budapest to Gettysburg (2007), directed by his son Jake Boritt. In 2009 he retired.
Gabor Boritt was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln (the State’s highest honor) by the Governor of Illinois in 2009 as a Bicentennial Laureate.
Boritt and his wife Liz live in an 18th-century farmhouse on the edge of the Gettysburg battlefield which they restored with their own hands. It served as both a stop on the Underground Railroad and as a Confederate hospital. Together they have raised three sons: Beowulf Boritt is a set designer (and streaming video ad star) in New York City, Jake Boritt is a filmmaker who lives in Harlem, and Daniel Boritt is a biologist specializing in birds who lives in Indianapolis, Indiana.


== Works ==
Lincoln and the Economics of the American Dream (1978) (ASIN B010TTIP5I),
Changing the Lincoln Image (1985) [ASIN B001Q90WOI)
Lincoln, The War President: The Gettysburg Lectures (1992) (with Robert V. Bruce) (ISBN 9780195078916)
Why the Confederacy Lost (1992) (ASIN B0099L2F9A)
Lincoln's Generals (1995) (ISBN 978-0195101102)
War Comes Again: Comparative Vistas on the Civil War and World War II (with David Eisenhower) (ISBN 978-0195088458)
The Historian's Lincoln: Pseudohistory, Psychohistory, and History (1996) (ISBN 978-0252065446)
The Gettysburg Nobody Knows (1997) (ISBN 978-0195102239)
Jefferson Davis's Generals (1999) (ISBN 978-0195120622)
The Lincoln Enigma: The Changing Faces of an American Icon (2002) (ISBN 978-0195156263)
The Lincoln Image: Abraham Lincoln and the Popular Print (2005) (ISBN 978-0252069840)
The Gettysburg Gospel: The Lincoln Speech Nobody Knows (2006) (ISBN 978-0743288217)
Slavery, Resistance, Freedom (with Scott Hancock) (2009) (ISBN 978-0195384604)
The Will of God Prevails: Meditations on God and the Gettysburg Address (2014) (ISBN 978-1626207202)


== See also ==
Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College
Lincoln Prize
Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History
Gettysburg College


== References ==

This article is partly based on the documentary film, Budapest to Gettysburg.


== External links ==
Budapest to Gettysburg
The Gettysburg Gospel
New York Times OpEd Radio Free Lincoln
Gettysburg College Civil War Institute
Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission
President Bush Awards 2008 National Humanities Medals
N.E.H. detailed profile
Interview on The Gettysburg Gospel at the Pritzker Military Museum & Library
Appearances on C-SPANNoah Brooks (October 24, 1830 – August 16, 1903) was a journalist and editor who worked for newspapers in Sacramento, San Francisco, Newark, and New York, and authored a major biography of Abraham Lincoln based on close personal observation. Born in Castine, Maine, he moved to Dixon, Illinois in 1856, where he became involved in the first Republican campaign for President (John Frémont). During the campaign, he became friends with Lincoln. Brooks moved to Kansas in 1857 as a "free state" settler, but returned to Illinois about a year later, then moved to California in 1859. After the death of his wife in 1862, Brooks moved to Washington, D.C. to cover the Lincoln administration for the Sacramento Daily Union. He was accepted into the Lincoln household as an old friend. Unlike most people, Brooks was able to maintain a close friendship with both the President and Mrs. Lincoln. When Brooks was detailed to cover the 1864 Democratic Convention in Chicago, President Lincoln asked Brooks to also report back in detail by private letter.
Brooks' 258 Washington dispatches for the Sacramento Daily Union were published under the name "Castine." In 1895, Brooks published his biography of Lincoln, Washington in Lincoln's Time, based on his Castine articles, as well as personal observations and interviews. The book is now considered an indispensable source of information on the Lincoln White House.
In 1901, Brooks published The Story of the Lewis and Clark Expedition based largely on the Nicholas Biddle history of the Expedition. Brooks was assisted by the notes written in the margins of his manuscript by Dr. Elliott Coues, who had edited the 1894 edition of Biddle, and who had wide experience as an explorer of the American West.


== Film & TV ==
In the 2017 documentary film The Gettysburg Address, Brooks is portrayed by actor Jason Alexander.


== Notes ==


== References ==
The Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia, Mark E. Neely Jr., New York, NY, 1982.
"Introduction," The Story of the Lewis and Clark Expedition Mineloa, NY, 2004.
Noah Brooks -- Wilson Museum Bulletin
The National Cyclopedia of American Biography


== External links ==
Works by Noah Brooks at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Noah Brooks at Internet Archive
Washington in Lincoln's Time from the Internet Archives' American Libraries.
Mr. Lincoln's White House on Noah Brooks An article backed by the Lehrman Institute.Forced into Glory: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream (2000) is a book by Lerone Bennett, Jr., an African American scholar and historian, and executive editor of Ebony Magazine for decades. It criticizes President Abraham Lincoln and claims that his reputation as the "Great Emancipator" during the American Civil War is undeserved.
In his introduction, Bennett wrote:

The "basic idea of the book is simple: Everything you think you know about Lincoln and race is wrong. Every schoolchild, for example, knows the story of 'the great emancipator' who freed Negroes with a stroke of the pen out of the goodness of his heart. The real Lincoln... was a conservative politician who said repeatedly that he believed in white supremacy. Not only that: He opposed the basic principle of the Emancipation Proclamation until his death and was literally forced - Count Adam Gurowski said he was literally whipped - 'into the glory of having issued the Emancipation Proclamation,' which Lincoln drafted in such a way that it did not in and of itself free a single slave."

The book is dedicated to those individuals whom Bennett calls "the real abolitionists", including Frederick Douglass, Thaddeus Stevens and Wendell Phillips. In the dedication, he praises them for forcing "Lincoln into glory."
Bennett's critics, including historians James M. McPherson, Eric Foner and Lucas E. Morel, believe that he ignored Lincoln's political and moral growth during the Civil War. In addition, they thought he oversimplified the complexities of the times on issues of race when attacking Lincoln. They disagreed with Bennett and have concluded that Lincoln was instrumental in creating the framework that brought freedom to slaves in the United States.
In a 2009 review of three newly published books on Lincoln, historian Brian Dirck referred to Bennett's 2000 work and linked him with Thomas DiLorenzo, another critic of Lincoln. He wrote that "Few Civil War scholars take Bennett and DiLorenzo seriously, pointing to their narrow political agenda and faulty research."


== See also ==
The Real Lincoln


== External links ==
Booknotes interview with Bennett on Forced Into Glory, 10 September 2000.
"An African-American Icon Speaks Truth to the Lincoln Cult", Thomas J. DiLorenzo, Lew Rockwell blog, 12 January 2008.


== References ==The Real Lincoln: A New Look at Abraham Lincoln, His Agenda, and an Unnecessary War is a biography of Abraham Lincoln written by Thomas DiLorenzo in 2002. He was severely critical of Lincoln's presidency.


== Summary ==
DiLorenzo criticizes Lincoln for the suspension of habeas corpus, violations of the First Amendment, war crimes committed by generals in the American Civil War, and the expansion of government power. He argues that Lincoln's views on race exhibited forms of bigotry that are commonly overlooked today(See Abraham Lincoln on slavery). He says that Lincoln instigated the American Civil War not over slavery but rather to centralize power and to enforce the strongly protectionist Morrill Tariff; similarly, he criticizes Lincoln for his strong support of Henry Clay's American System.. DiLorenzo regards Lincoln as the political and ideological heir of Alexander Hamilton and contends that Lincoln achieved by the use of armed force the centralized state which Hamilton failed to create in the early years of the United States.
DiLorenzo's negative view of Lincoln is explicitly derived from his Anarcho-capitalist views. He considers Lincoln to have opened the way to later instances of government involvement in the American economy, for example Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, of which DiLorenzo strongly disapproves. DiLorenzo objects to historians who described Lincoln as having carried out "A capitalist revolution", since in DiLorenzo's view Protectionist policies such as Lincoln strongly advocated and implemented "are not true Capitalism". In DiLorenzo's explicitly expressed view, only Free Trade policies are truly Capitalist—a distinction not shared by most economists and political scientists. Also, DiLorenzo declares Protectionism and Mercantilism to be one the same, using the two as interchangeable and frequently talking of "Lincoln's Mercantilist policies". In general, academics do not regard Protectionism and Mercantilism as being identical—at most regarding the two as having some common features.
In the Foreword to DiLorenzo's book, Walter E. Williams, a professor of economics at George Mason University, says that "Abraham Lincoln’s direct statements indicated his support for slavery," and adds that he "defended slave owners’ right to own their property" by supporting the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850.


== Reception ==
Herman Belz reviewed DiLorenzo's book together with Charles Adams' When in the Course of Human Events: Arguing the Case for Southern Secession, and claimed that it quoted Lincoln out of context, saying

"with respect to the books under review, there is a temptation for writers oblivious to the requirements of historical scholarship to treat Lincoln's speeches and writings as a polemical grab bag from which to select materials, abstracted from their historical context, that can be used to present Lincoln in an unfavorable light. Thomas J. DiLorenzo and Charles Adams, writing from the point of view that in academic economics is labeled anarcho-capitalist libertarianism, scavenge the documentary record in an attempt to show Lincoln as a revolutionary centralizer who used national sovereignty to establish corporate-mercantilist hegemony at the expense of genuine economic liberty."

He says they have a "simple-minded understanding of the relationship between politics and economics, between moral ends and productive entrepreneurial activity." He also noted that "these not very scholarly books" were of most interest for "their reflection of recent trends in Civil War historiography. Two developments stand out. The first is radicalization of the interrelated issues of slavery, civil rights, and race relations. The second development is a revival of interest in secession as a solution to the problem of government centralization." 
Reviewing for The Independent Review, Richard M. Gamble noted that DiLorenzo’s book "manages to raise fresh and morally probing questions" and that it "exposes Lincoln’s embarrassing views on race, his ambition for economic nationalism, his rewriting of the history of the founding of the nation, his cavalier violation of constitutional limits on the presidency, and his willingness to wage a barbaric total war to achieve his ends". But, Gamble notes that The Real Lincoln "is seriously compromised by careless errors of fact, misuse of sources, and faulty documentation," which taken all together "constitute a near-fatal threat to DiLorenzo’s credibility as a historian."
Gamble listed numerous fallacies of the book as follows: "Thomas Jefferson was not among the framers of the Constitution (pp. 69–70); Lincoln advised sending freed slaves to Liberia in a speech in 1854, not “during the war” (pp. 16–17); Lincoln was not a member of the Illinois state legislature in 1857 (p. 18); the commerce clause was not an “amendment,”; Thaddeus Stevens was a Pennsylvania representative, not a senator (p. 140); and Fort Sumter was not a customs house (p. 242)." Additionally: "In chapter 3, DiLorenzo claims that in a letter to Salmon P. Chase, Lincoln “admitted that the original [Emancipation] proclamation had no legal justification, except as a war measure” (p. 37). His source, however, is the recollections of a conversation (not a letter) that portrait artist Francis B. Carpenter (not Chase) had with Lincoln, and at no point do these recollections sustain DiLorenzo’s summary of them. Moreover, in the reference for this section, DiLorenzo misidentifies the title of his source as Paul Angle’s The American Reader, when in fact the jumbled material comes from Angle’s The Lincoln Reader." He also notes that DiLorenzo claims, for example, "that in the four years between 1860 and 1864, population in the thirteen largest Northern cities rose by 70 percent” (p. 225)." Gamble checks the source and finds it says that total rate of growth took place over 15 years.
Ken Masugi of the Claremont Institute in National Review wrote that "DiLorenzo frequently distorts the meaning of the primary sources he cites, Lincoln most of all." Masugi provides the following example:

Consider this inflammatory assertion: "Eliminating every last black person from American soil, Lincoln proclaimed, would be 'a glorious consummation.'" Compare the nuances and qualifications in what Lincoln actually said: "If as the friends of colonization hope, the present and coming generations of our countrymen shall by any means, succeed in freeing our land from the dangerous presence of slavery; and, at the same time, in restoring a captive people to their long-lost father-land, with bright prospects for the future; and this too, so gradually, that neither races nor individuals shall have suffered by the change, it will indeed be a glorious consummation." One need not be a Lincoln admirer to recognize that DiLorenzo is making an unfair characterization. DiLorenzo actually gets so overwrought that at one point he attributes to Lincoln racist views Lincoln was attacking.

Masugi further asserts that DiLorenzo failed to recognize "a disunited America might have become prey for the designs of European imperial powers, which would have put an end to the experiment in self-government."
DiLorenzo responded saying that Masugi was selective in his presentation about Lincoln and "relies entirely on a few of Lincoln’s prettier speeches, ignoring his less attractive ones as well as his actual behavior." He concluded that Lincoln used his considerable rhetorical skills to camouflage his true intentions and mask his behavior.
Ken Whitefield noted that "DiLorenzo enumerates various other 19th Century nations which abolished slavery without resorting to civil war - which is true. He points out that a small percentage of the money and resources spent on the Civil War would have sufficed to compensate all slave owners and provide land to all released slaves - and the numbers certainly back him up. But DiLorenzo also praises and idealizes the pre-1861 structure of the United States, as a confederation of virtually independent entities - each of which had a recognized right of secession of which it could make use, or threaten to use, at any time. What DiLorenzo persistently refuses to do is to link up these two issues - which were in reality very tightly bound up with each other. As even the most superficial student of pre-1861 American politics knows, there was no greater taboo than suggesting that the Federal government touch slavery in the South in any way or manner whatsoever. There was no way the South would have allowed any President or Congress to spend a single tax-payers' Dollar for compensating slave-owners. For much less than that they several times threatened to secede, for much less than that they finally did secede. In short - the reason why the US, alone of all slave-holding nations, needed to go through a terrible civil war in order to end slavery is that the system of entrenched States' Rights made it impossible to do it any other way. For the slaves to be free, Lincoln had to smash States' Rights by main force - there was no other way. True, in doing that Lincoln had various other agendas beside slavery, agendas which were more important to him than slavery; there can hardly be any debate on that, since Lincoln himself said so repeatedly at the time itself. Still, ultimately it was Lincoln who liberated the slaves. It was done in a terribly painful way, because the South had firmly blocked the less painful ways".
Writing in 2013 about DiLorenzo's book and the work of other "Lincoln haters," Rich Lowry said,

"The anti-Lincolnites hate that the North instituted a progressive income tax; they never bother to complain that the Confederacy did the same. They hate that Lincoln suspended habeas corpus; they never note that Jefferson Davis did, too. They hate that the North resorted to a draft; they don't care that the Confederacy also had one. They hate that Lincoln fought a war against his countrymen; it evidently never occurs to them that Jefferson Davis shot back (let alone that he fired the first shot)."


== See also ==
Forced into Glory


== Notes ==


== Further reading ==
Feller, Daniel (2004). "Libertarians in the Attic, or A Tale of Two Narratives". Reviews in American History. 32 (2): 184–95. doi:10.1353/rah.2004.0025. JSTOR 30031836. 
Dirck, Brian (2009). "Father Abraham: Lincoln's Relentless Struggle to End Slavery, and: Act of Justice: Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation and the Law of War, and: Lincoln and Freedom: Slavery, Emancipation, and the Thirteenth Amendment (review)". Civil War History. 55 (3): 382–5. doi:10.1353/cwh.0.0090. 
Uhlmann, Michael M., Krannawitter, Thomas L. "Father Abraham Under Fire Again". May 20, 2002. Claremont Institute.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Krannawitter, Thomas L. "Dishonest About Abe". January 31, 2009. Claremont Institute. A review of The Real Lincoln 


== External links ==
BookTV: The Real Lincoln lecture by Thomas DiLorenzo, May 2002
The Real Abraham Lincoln: A Debate debate transcript with Harry V. Jaffa & Thomas J. DiLorenzo, May 2002
Abraham Lincoln interview with Thomas J. DiLorenzo by C-SPAN, 2008 (YouTube)Louise Taper is a historian and collector of Abraham Lincoln artifacts.
She created the exhibition The Last Best Hope of Earth: Abraham Lincoln and the Promise of America which was at the Huntington Library from 1993–1994 and at the Chicago Historical Society from 1996-1997. She also served as an historical consultant for the television mini-series Sandburg’s Lincoln. She is co-author of the book Right or Wrong, God Judge Me: The Writings of John Wilkes Booth, published by the University of Illinois Press. She serves on the boards of the Abraham Lincoln Association, the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum Foundation, the Lincoln Forum, the Lincoln Legal Papers, Center Theatre Group and the Lincoln Prize at Gettysburg College. She is also a trustee of Lincoln College.
She created the Taper collection, which was purchased by the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum for what is estimated at $20M.


== Awards ==
Louise Taper was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln (the State’s highest honor) by the Governor of Illinois in 2009 as a Bicentennial Laureate.


== References ==Abraham Lincoln: The Man (also called Standing Lincoln) is a larger-than-life size (12-foot (3.7 m)) bronze statue of Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the United States. The original statue is in Lincoln Park in Chicago, and several replicas have been installed in other places around the world. Completed by Augustus Saint-Gaudens in 1887, it has been described as the most important sculpture of Lincoln from the 19th century. At the time, the New York Evening Post called it "the most important achievement American sculpture has yet produced." Abraham Lincoln II, Lincoln's only grandson, was present, among a crowd of 10,000, at the unveiling. The artist later created the Seated Lincoln sculpture in Chicago's Grant Park.


== Design ==
The sculpture depicts a contemplative Lincoln rising from a chair, about to give a speech. It is set upon a pedestal and, in Chicago, an exedra designed by architect Stanford White. Chicago businessman Eli Bates (1806–1881) provided $40,000 in his will for the statue. Saint-Gaudens was specially selected for the commission after a design competition failed to produce a winning artist. Saint-Gaudens, who revered the President, had seen Lincoln at the time of his inauguration, and later viewed Lincoln's body lying in state. For his design, the artist also relied on a life mask and hand casts made of Lincoln in 1860 by Leonard W. Volk. While planning and working on the Standing Lincoln, Saint-Gaudens was first enticed to what would become his home and studio, and an associated artist's colony. To convince him to vacation near Cornish, New Hampshire, a friend told him the area had "many Lincoln-shaped men."


== Legacy ==

The sculpture's naturalism influenced a generation of artists. The monument was also a favorite of Hull House founder Jane Addams, who once wrote, "I walked the wearisome way from Hull-House to Lincoln Park ... in order to look at and gain magnanimous counsel from the statue." Journalist Andrew Ferguson discusses the statue at length in his book Land of Lincoln, writing that the statue presents "a sort of world-weariness that seems almost kind". The City of Chicago awarded the monument landmark status on December 12, 2001. It is located near the Chicago History Museum and North Avenue.
Replicas of the statue stand at Lincoln Tomb in Springfield, Illinois; Parque Lincoln in Mexico City; and Parliament Square in London. The Parliament Square statue was given to Britain in July 1920. The American Ambassador made a formal presentation at Central Hall, Westminster, where Prime Minister David Lloyd George accepted the gift on behalf of the people of Britain; after a procession to Parliament Square, the statue was unveiled by Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught. The Mexico City statue was presented by United States President Lyndon Johnson to the people of Mexico in 1964. Later, Johnson received a small copy of the bust from the statue, which since then is often seen displayed in the Oval Office of the White House. In 2016, a newly cast replica was installed at Saint-Gaudens National Historic Site in Cornish, New Hampshire.
From 1910 onwards, Saint-Gaudens' widow, Augusta, oversaw the casting of a number of smaller replicas of the statue, reduced to slightly under one-third the size of the original. Some of these replicas are now held by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, the Yale University Art Gallery, the Harvard Art Museums, Fay School, Southborough MA, the Jackson District Library in Jackson, Michigan, the Newark Museum, New Jersey, and the Saint-Gaudens National Historic Site.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Master Sculptor, exhibition catalog fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on this statueHer Country's Call is a 1917 American silent drama film directed by Lloyd Ingraham. The film is the final installment in a series a films written by Abraham Lincoln impersonator Benjamin Chapin.
The film starred Mary Miles Minter, George Periolat, and Allan Forrest. The film's writer, Benjamin Chapin, also appeared as Abraham Lincoln. It is presumed to be a lost film.


== Plot ==
Jess Slocum (Minter) is a mountain girl who was stolen as a baby by moonshiner Jim. She was raised to hate America, but is now taken in by Captain Earle Neville when Jim is sent to jail. Earle takes care of Jess, who is wounded, but she is afraid of her new surroundings and soon runs back to the mountain. On her way back, she overhears a group of Mexicans planning to destroy the nearby camp. She rushes back to warn them and is declared a hero. Jim confesses that Jess is the daughter of Confederate Army Colonel Tremaine. He had taken revenge on the Colonel when he was thrown out of the camp. Jess is reunited with her father and falls in love with Earle.


== Cast ==

Mary Miles Minter - Jess Slocum
George Periolat - Jim Slocum
Allan Forrest - Capt. Earle Neville
Henry A. Barrows - Col. Tremaine
Margaret Shelby - Marie Tremaine
Ashton Dearholt - John Reynolds
Benjamin Chapin - Abraham Lincoln


== Reception ==
Like many American films of the time, Her Country's Call was subject to cuts by city and state film censorship boards. The Chicago Board of Censors required a cut of the scenes of selling whiskey to an Indian and the shooting of a guard.


== References ==


== External links ==
Her Country's Call at the Internet Movie Database
Her Country's Call synopsis at AllMovieRichard Nelson Current (October 5, 1912 – October 26, 2012) was an American historian, called "the Dean of Lincoln Scholars", best known for The Lincoln Nobody Knows (1958), and Lincoln and the First Shot (1963).


== Life ==
Born in Colorado City, Colorado, Current graduated in 1934 from Oberlin College with a B.A., in 1935 from The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University with an M.A., and in 1940 from the University of Wisconsin–Madison with a Ph.D.
Within the United States, Current taught at Rutgers University, Hamilton College, Northern Michigan University, Lawrence University, Mills College, Salisbury State University, the University of Illinois, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Internationally, he lectured in Chile, Japan, India, and Antarctica.
Current served as president of the Southern Historical Association in 1975. In addition, he was the editor and/or author of introductions in many other works, and published over 250 articles. His papers are in the Rare Book Room of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
His first wife of 45 years Rose Bonar died in 1983, after which in 1984 he married Marcia Ewing, who co-wrote a biography of dancer Loie Fuller with him. His final book, a collection of translations of writings by the Norwegian author Knut Hamsun was published in 2003.
He died in Boston, Massachusetts on October 26, 2012 at age 100 of Parkinson's disease, and was buried in Greensboro, North Carolina.


== Dean of Lincoln Scholars ==
Current came late to the study of Abraham Lincoln, having published books on 19th century political leaders Thaddeus Stevens, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun, and the history of the typewriter when he was asked to complete a 4-volume biography of Lincoln begun by his University of Illinois colleague James G. Randall, who had finished three volumes before his 1953 death. Current wrote at least half of the fourth volume Lincoln the President: Midstream to the Last Full Measure (1955), which won the prestigious Bancroft Prize from Columbia University, establishing his reputation.
Drawn to what he called the "perpetual timeliness" and "eternal relevance" of Lincoln's life, Current went on to write seven more books about him. One of his most influential books was The Lincoln Nobody Knows (1958), which delved into the seemingly contradictory elements of Lincoln's life and thought, particularly his views on slavery and race, showing how he overcame the narrow thinking of his childhood in the backwoods of Kentucky and Indiana where racist and white supremacist views were common.
"The most remarkable thing about him was his tremendous power for growth", Current wrote in The Lincoln Nobody Knows. "He grew in sympathy, in the breadth of his humaneness, as he grew in other aspects of the mind and spirit. In more ways than one he succeeded in breaking through the narrow bounds of his early environment." "The awful fact of the assassination falls between us and the man. It is like a garish, bloodstained glass, in which all perspectives are distorted."
His 1963 book Lincoln and the First Shot seeks to dispel many myths about Lincoln, including the theory that some of the members of his Cabinet were in on the assassination conspiracy. Current described how Lincoln built a unity of purpose in the Northern states before the Civil War began in earnest, claiming that Lincoln had a more sophisticated knowledge of law, economics, military tactics et al. than earlier historians had believed.


== Debate with Gore Vidal ==
After Gore Vidal published his 1984 novel Lincoln, Current began a running feud in the pages of The New York Review of Books, accusing Vidal of willfully distorting the historical record, misrepresenting Lincoln's views, and "utter ignorance" of the linguistic differences between British English and American English because he did spell "jewelry" and "practice" in the British way. "He is wrong on big as well as little matters", Current summarized. "Vidal simply doesn't know what he's talking about."
In response, Vidal explained that he used what was then common to agreed-upon American speech, and as a writer of novels was obliged to dramatize his story through someone's consciousness. Vidal asserted that Current never read his book in whole, that he was fault finding, and could not separate a biography from a novel, "getting all tangled up in misread or misunderstood trivia". The real reason for Current's criticism, Vidal maintained, was his portrayal of Lincoln as wanting to colonize the liberated slaves in Liberia, which would go against the political correctness of the 1980s. Famously, Vidal listed as his source for this interpretation a biography of Lincoln by Richard N. Current!


== Awards ==
1956 Bancroft Prize
1959 Fulbright Professor in Munich, Germany
1960 O. Max Gardner Prize from the University of North Carolina
1962 Harold Vyvyan Harmsworth Professor of American History at Oxford University
1977 George Banta Award from the Wisconsin Library Association
1988 Notable Wisconsin Authors
1989 Logan Hay Medal from the Abraham Lincoln Association
2000 Lincoln Prize for lifetime achievement
2000 Richard Nelson Current Award of Achievement from The Lincoln Forum


== Works ==
Old Thad Stevens: A Story of Ambition, 1942.
Pine Logs and Politics: A Life of Philetus Sawyer, 1816-1900, 1950.
The Typewriter and the Men Who Made It, 1954.
Secretary Stimson: A Study in Statecraft (Rutger University Press, New Brunswick, N.J., 1954) read online
Daniel Webster and the Rise of National Conservatism (1955) read online
Lincoln the President: Midstream to the Last Full Measure (With James G. Randall) (1955) (Bancroft Prize) read online
The Lincoln Nobody Knows (1958) read online
Why the North Won the Civil War, essays by Richard N. Current and David Herbert Donald, 1960
American History: A Survey (With Frank Freidel and T. Harry Williams), 1961.
Lincoln and the First Shot, (J.P. Lippincott, New York, 1963) read online
John C. Calhoun, 1963.
United States History (With A. DeConde and H.L. Dante), 1967.
Three Carpetbag Governors, 1967.
Essentials of American History (with others) (New York: Knopf, 1972, 1980) read online
United States History: A World Power (With A. DeConde and H.L. Dante), 1974.
United States History: Search for Freedom (With A. DeConde and H.L. Dante), 1974.
Wisconsin: The Civil War Era 1848-1873, 1976.
Wisconsin: A Bicentennial History, 1977.
Unity, Ethnicity, and Abraham Lincoln, 1978.
A History of the United States (With G. Goodwin), 1980.
Speaking of Abraham Lincoln: The Man and His Meaning for Our Times, 1983.
Northernizing the South, 1983.
Arguing with Historians: Essays on the Historical and the Unhistorical, 1987.
Those Terrible Carpetbaggers, 1988.
Lincoln, the Constitution, and Presidential Leadership, 1989.
Daniel Webster, 'the Completest Man' (With others), 1990.
Phi Beta Kappa in American Life: The First Two Hundred Years, 1990.
Encyclopedia of the Confederacy (Editor), 1993.
What Is an American? Abraham Lincoln and 'Multiculturalism', 1993.
Lincoln's Loyalists: Union Soldiers from the Confederacy, 1994.
Lincoln on Democracy (With others), 1994.
Loie Fuller, Goddess of Light (With Marcia Ewing Current), 1997.
Knut Hamsun Remembers America: Essays and Stories, 1885-1949 (Translator), 2003.


== References ==


== External links ==
Richard N. Current | University of Illinois ArchivesWard Hill Lamon (January 6, 1828 – May 7, 1893) was a personal friend and self-appointed bodyguard of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln. Lamon was famously absent the night Lincoln was assassinated at Ford's Theatre on April 14, 1865, having been sent by Lincoln to Richmond, Virginia.


== Background ==
Lamon's relation with Lincoln has been traced by Clint Clay Tilton in Lincoln and Lamon. Lamon was born near Winchester, Virginia, studied medicine for two years, and moved to Danville, Illinois, when he was 19 to live with relatives. He attended the University of Louisville to receive his law degree and was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1851. In 1850, he moved back to Virginia, married Angelina Turner, and then returned to Illinois to practice law. Angelina was a daughter of Ehud and Priscilla Strode Turner, whose house at Beddington, West Virginia, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2002 as the Priscilla Strode Turner House. Angelina died in April 1859, leaving a daughter, Dorothy, who was raised in Danville by Lamon's sister, Mrs. William Morgan. In November 1860, Lamon married Sally Logan, daughter of Judge Stephen T. Logan. Logan had been Lincoln's law partner from 1851 to 1854.


== Early years with Lincoln ==
Lamon's professional association with Lincoln started in 1852. Lamon became the prosecuting attorney for the Old Eighth Judicial district and subsequently moved to Bloomington, Illinois, in 1858. While Lamon had Southern sympathies and his hatred of abolitionism set him apart from Lincoln, they remained friends, despite their very different characters. Lamon joined the then-young Republican Party and campaigned for Lincoln in 1860. Lincoln was up against New York Senator William Seward for the Republican nomination, and Lamon proved his friendship by printing up extra tickets for the convention to fill the hall with Lincoln supporters. When Lincoln was elected President, Lamon hoped for a foreign diplomatic post, but received a letter from his friend that said, "Dear Hill, I need you. I want you to go to Washington with me and be prepared for a long stay."  Lamon then accompanied him as he traveled from Springfield, Illinois, to Washington D.C. in February 1861. This trip would prove to be eventful.


== Lamon and the Baltimore Plot, 1861 ==

Lamon was a physically imposing man, and during the presidency, often took it upon himself to guard Lincoln. In February 1861, detective Allan Pinkerton uncovered a plot whereby Lincoln would be assassinated when he arrived in Baltimore on his way to his inauguration in Washington. Pinkerton advised Lincoln that rather than ride publicly through the city between train stations as planned, he should take a midnight train straight through to Washington. Lamon was the sole friend chosen to accompany him.
Lamon and Pinkerton famously clashed over the President-elect's protection. Lamon offered Lincoln "a Revolver and a Bowie Knife" but Pinkerton protested that he "would not for the world have it said that Mr. Lincoln had to enter the national Capital armed". The two men further disagreed over Lamon's desire to alert the Chicago Journal to their early arrival in Washington because Pinkerton, more prudently, wished not to publicize their change of plans. In Pinkerton's account of the plot, he wrote disparagingly of Lamon, referring to him as a "brainless, egotistical fool". Pinkerton allowed William Herndon to copy his report, which was obtained by Lamon when he purchased Herndon's papers to write his Life of Abraham Lincoln. However, when Herndon first requested copies of Pinkerton's report, Pinkerton agreed only on the condition that certain material be kept confidential, specifically naming his remarks about Lamon.
Lamon's description detailed the manipulations of Pinkerton. Months before Lincoln traveled through Baltimore, Samuel M. Felton, president of the Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad, had hired Pinkerton. There was unemployment in Baltimore. It is conceivable that Felton's security concerns may have been about workers destroying bridges to create jobs for themselves and that homeless persons were living near railroad facilities.
Pinkerton began an entrapment scheme by opening an office in Baltimore. Pinkerton publicized his duplicity and attracted dissatisfied elements. Lamon asserts that the motive of Pinkerton was to increase the demand for his service and profits. Pinkerton's agents were reputed to frequent bars and brothels to utilize local information sources. Barr's saloon on South Street was one of the bars they patronized. The agents established that intemperate persons were not modulating their speech about politics while drinking with the targets of their investigation. Informants were paid money.
There were disputes among the power brokers accompanying Lincoln on his journey to Washington as to who had more common sense or the most courage to assist the President-elect. Pinkerton, accompanied by a female spy, met Lincoln in Philadelphia on 21 February and advised him of the need for increased security because he heard credible stories from intoxicated sources. In the coded messages of Pinkerton's operatives, apparently the female spy was "Plums" and Lincoln was "Nuts".
Lincoln was secreted through Baltimore during the night. The train carrying Mrs. Lincoln and others went through Baltimore unharmed the next day, despite the claim of Pinkerton that hand grenades and fire bombs would be used to attack the train.
Lamon summed up his disbelief in the plot in the biography: "It is perfectly manifest that there was no conspiracy, – no conspiracy of a hundred, of fifty, of twenty, of three; no definite purpose in the heart of even one man to murder Mr. Lincoln in Baltimore."


== Lamon as U.S. Marshal and his relationship with Lincoln 1861–1865 ==
Shortly after his inauguration in 1861, Lincoln appointed Lamon United States Marshal of the District of Columbia; he resigned his commission in June 1865. One of Lamon's first acts as Marshal was to visit Fort Sumter, South Carolina in March 1861, to meet with Major Robert Anderson, commander of the fort, and Governor Francis Pickens. Reports vary on Lamon's responsibilities with regard to that visit.
One account chronicles that Lamon was just one of a few emissaries sent by Lincoln, the first being Captain Gustavus Fox, who went to determine if Fort Sumter could be relieved by sea. Lamon was sent concurrently with another Illinois friend of Lincoln's, Stephen Hurlbut, with the implication that Lamon was sent to take the focus off of Hurlbut's visit as Hurlbut was there to measure anti-Union sentiment in Charleston (he discovered it was high). Lamon incurred Lincoln's displeasure by meeting with Governor Pickens and informing him of the government's interest in withdrawing from Fort Sumter.
Another account represents Lamon as traveling with the full confidence of Lincoln: "It called for courage and the trip was made over the objection of Secretary Seward. 'Mr. Secretary,' said Lincoln, 'I have known to be in many a close place and he's never been in one he didn't get out of. By Jing. I'll risk it. Go, Lamon, and God bless you.'" Yet another account characterizes Lamon as being under Seward's influence and angering Lincoln: "It was under Seward's influence that he actually told Governor Pickens that he had come to arrange for the withdrawal of the garrison, and that after his return he wrote the governor that he would be back in a few days to assist with the evacuation. He also gave Major Anderson the impression that no relief would be attempted. All this was outrageous, and when Lincoln heard of Lamon's letter to Pickens, he indignantly denied that the man possessed any authority to make such a statement." Missions to Fort Sumter aside, the marshal's position was not an onerous one and afforded Lamon legitimate access to the President. What Lamon took upon himself, however, was to represent himself as Lincoln's bodyguard, which he did out of friendship rather than the requirements of the position.
Lamon took this so seriously that his friend Leonard Swett recounted that in the three months he stayed with Lamon in the Fall of 1864, he saw Lamon leave every night to go to the White House where he patrolled the grounds. On one of these patrols, he dealt a blow between the eyes to a man skulking in the bushes on the White House grounds, killing him. The man was taken to the Secret Services offices, where he was searched and found to be a Southern gentleman in possession of two pistols and two knives. Presidential secretary John Hay adds to this portrait of devotion by noting in his diary that one night he observed Lamon wrap himself up in his cloak and lie down to sleep in front of Lincoln's bedroom door. Lamon was not in Washington on the night of Lincoln's assassination, being on assignment in Richmond. In his Recollections of Abraham Lincoln Lamon reveals that before he left for Richmond, he implored the president not to "go out at night after [he] was gone, particularly to the theatre." After the assassination, Lamon accompanied the funeral procession to Springfield, Illinois.


== Lamon as Lincoln's biographer ==

After Lincoln's death, Lamon published two books (one posthumously) about the late President. The more famous of the two is a biography that was largely ghostwritten by Chauncey Black, the son of former Attorney General of the United States Jeremiah Black. The elder Black was Lamon's law partner from 1865 until 1879. The book, published in 1872 by James R. Osgood and Company of Boston under the title The Life of Abraham Lincoln; From his Birth to his Inauguration as President, contained allegations and personal information about Lincoln that were deemed scandalous by nineteenth century society. It was a financial failure. One of the most shocking claims was that Lincoln was not a man of faith: "Mr. Lincoln was never a member of any church, nor did he believe in the divinity of Christ, or the inspiration of the Scriptures in the sense understood by evangelical Christians." The basis of the book was the papers of William Herndon, which Lamon purchased for either $2,000 or $4,000. Shortly after his death, Lamon's daughter collected and edited many of his unpublished writings about Lincoln into a biography of the president, Recollections of Abraham Lincoln (1895). In Recollections, Lamon reversed his earlier denial of the Baltimore plot of 1861, writing, "It is now an acknowledged fact that there was never a moment from the day he crossed the Maryland line, up until the time of his assassination, that he was not in danger of death by violence, and that his life was spared until the night of the 14th of April, 1865, only through the ceaseless and watchful care of the guards thrown around him." The authenticity of this book is generally more highly regarded by the scholarly community than is the earlier volume by Lamon and Black.


== Lamon after Lincoln's death ==
Lamon had tendered his resignation as Marshal of the District of Columbia in June 1865. In April 1866, Lamon purchased the funeral rail car that transported Lincoln's remains to Springfield, Illinois. The price he paid for the rail car was a little less than $10,000. He was offered the cabinet position of Postmaster General but declined. He formed his law partnership with Jeremiah Black (referenced above), and the law practice dissolved in 1879 due to the poor reception of The Life of Lincoln ghostwritten by Black's son Chauncey. In 1879, Lamon and his wife Sally moved to Boulder, Colorado, and later to Denver where he formed a friendship with poet Eugene Field. The ill health of both Lamon and Sally caused them to return to Washington in 1886, and in 1889 they traveled to Europe for the spas and subsequently Sally died in Brussels in 1892.

Lamon moved to Martinsburg, West Virginia, where he was cared for by his daughter Dorothy until his death on May 7, 1893. He was 65 years old. Lamon was buried in Gerrardstown, West Virginia, in the Presbyterian Cemetery. (Sally had been buried in Springfield, Illinois.) The home built by Lamon's cousin Joseph in Danville, Illinois, has become a museum.


== Perceptions of Lamon ==
Some contemporaries and biographers of Lincoln tend to treat Lamon with a certain casual contempt. In 1862, during his tenure as Marshal, a number of senators called for his removal from office. Although Lincoln refused this demand, the Senate was able to decrease some of Lamon's official duties and thus reduce his income. Allan Pinkerton's opinion of him was voiced above, during the Baltimore Plot. Historian Allan Nevins in The War for the Union characterizes Lamon as "a big loquacious bumbler of more self-assurance than discretion". Even one of Nevin's footnotes that discusses the controversial trip to Charleston in 1861 further dismisses Lamon: "Lamon's papers in the Huntington Library throw no light on the subject except to confirm his general ineptness." A few carry the flag for Lamon, however. In 1931, Clint Clay Tilton repeatedly affirms Lamon's generosity and good humor and dubs him "the Cavalier". When Lamon campaigned for Lincoln's re-election in 1864, a song was written with this verse remaining:

A great good man is Ward Hill Lamon;
Abe is Pythias; he is Damon;
He's the President's protector,
He's his political protector,
Who?
Ward Hill Lamon. Ward Hill Lamon.

Lamon's story is told in the film Saving Lincoln, which details the threats against Lincoln from Lamon's point of view.


== In popular culture ==
Lamon is portrayed by actor Lea Coco in the 2012 film, Saving Lincoln.
Lamon is portrayed by actor Sam Elliott in the 2015 documentary film The Gettysburg Address.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==
Barton, William Eleazar. The Soul of Abraham Lincoln. (1920)
Cuthbert, Norma Barrett (ed.). Lincoln and the Baltimore Plot, 1861. (1949)
Donald, David. Lincoln's Herndon. (1948)
Downing, David C. A South Divided: Portraits of Dissent in the Confederacy (2007)
Hamand, Lavern M. "Lincoln's Particular Friend" in Essays in Illinois History. (1968)
Lamon, Ward Hill. The Life of Abraham Lincoln: From His Birth to His Inauguration as President. (1872)
Lamon, Ward Hill. Recollections of Abraham Lincoln: 1847–1865. (1895)
Lawson, Sylvia B. "Logan, Stephen T."; http://www.anb.org/articles/04/04-00636.html; American National Biography Online February 2000.
"Lincoln Stole into Washington to Foil Possible Assassination", The New York Times, February 24, 1961, page 25.
Lurie, Jonathan. "Lamon, Ward Hill"; http://www.anb.org/articles/11/11-00506.html; American National Biography Online February 2000.
Mackay, James. Allan Pinkerton: The First Private Eye (1996)
Mitgang, Herbert. "'I Beg Leave To Offer. . . Abraham Lincoln'", The New York Times, May 15, 1960, page SM26.
Nevins, Allan. The War for the Union: Volume 1, The Improvised War, 1861–1862 (1959)
Oates, Stephen B. With Malice Toward None: The Life of Abraham Lincoln (1977)
Oedel, Howard T. "Lincoln Takes the Pulse of the Confederacy at Charleston in March, 1861" in Lincoln Herald 1971 73(3), pages 156–172.
Tilton, Clint Clay. "Lincoln and Lamon: Partners and Friends" in Publications of the Illinois State Historical Library (1931)
"Ward Hill Lamon." Dictionary of American Biography (1928–1936)
Wilson, Douglas L. and Rodney O. Davis, editors. Herndon's Informants (1998)


== External links ==
Lamon House History
Lincoln and his Marshal
Mr. Lincoln and Friends
Mr. Lincoln's White House: Ward Hill Lamon (1828–1893)
Works by Ward Hill Lamon at Project Gutenberg
Works by Ward Hill Lamon at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by or about Ward Hill Lamon at Internet Archive